I can think of a few approaches:

## 1. Eagerly rebuild the subclass method tables

We could keep doing copy-down inheritance like we do here. But also give each
superclass references to the set of subclasses that inherit from it. When a
superclass's method table is modified, it walks the subclasses and also updates
or rebuilds their now-invalidated method tables. That sounds slow, and it would
be. However, meta-programming like this usually happens only a couple of times
near the beginning of the program's execution and then stops. It's unusual for a
class's set of methods to change frequently during a program's run or inside a
hot loop. So this likely doesn't need to be fast.

## 2. Lazily rebuild the subclass method tables

The downside of 1 is that the superclass needs to maintain a list of every
subclass. Every single time a method is touched, the entire tree of subclasses
must be updated. If it's common to change a number of methods in succession,
that's a lot of work. Also, maintaining the list of references from superclass
to subclass makes GC harder (they'll need to be weak references if you want to
be able ever collect subclasses) and makes classes heavier-weight.

Another option is to have the subclass lazily rebuild its method table when it
sees the superclass has changed. In each class, we add a "version" integer
field. It starts out at zero and increments any time the class's set of methods
is modified. (In principle, this could overflow, but that's pretty unlikely.)

We also add an integer field to each class to track the version of its
*superclass*. This stores the version that the superclass was at when this
subclass inherited its methods.

When a subclass is declared, it copies the methods from its superclass, and
also records the superclass's current version number in its superclass version
field.

Whenever a class's method set changes after the declaration executes, we also
increment its version. If a subclass's own superclass version field is ever out
of sync with the version field on its actual superclass, then we know the
superclass has changed since the last time its methods were copied down.

When do we check that? The only real natural point in time is right before a
method call. Adding overhead to each method call is a drag, but it's a fairly
simple check between two numbers. If the two versions are out of sync, we
rebuild the subclass's method table and then re-sync the version numbers.

## 3. Lean on inline caching

This is probably the best approach (though I wouldn't put money on it). If the
VM already does some form of inline caching, then method lookup doesn't need to
be that. For a given callsite, you'll only do the lookup once and then rely on
the fast inline cache for most calls.

So in this case, we could keep something like jlox's slow approach where methods
are resolved by dynamically walking the inheritance chain. Then once we find the
method, we store it in the inline cache, and after that it's as fast as we could
want.

The only missing piece is handling the fact that the cache can now become
invalidated. If a class's method set cannot change, then the only way an inline
cache can become stale is if the class of the receiver changes. Now an inline
cache on the same receiver can become stale if a method changes and a lookup
would now produce a different method.

Inline caches usually track the receiver's class by having some kind of numeric
ID for each class. Each class stores its ID and in the inline cache, we store
the ID of the receiver's class that the method was called one. If those match,
the cache is valid.

We might be able to extend that by having a method change to a class change its
ID. It is as if metaprogramming a class produces a new class with a different
ID. Since the inline cache only stores the ID of the leaf-most class of the
receiver, we also have to ensure that metaprogramming a *superclass* also
affects the ID of the subclasses. So we'd want to do something like the approach
in 1 where changing a superclass means we traverse the tree of subclasses and
update their IDs too.

There are probably better solutions, but these are the first few that came to
mind.
