I have a solution that implements the right semantics and makes inner calls as
fast as any other method call. I won't walk through it in detail, but there is
a diff in this directory that you can apply to the result of chapter 29's code
to see the full thing.

The basic idea is that each `inner()` call gets compiled to a call to a method
whose name is a combination of the surrounding method name and a unique ID for
the containing class. So in:

```lox
class A {
  foo() {
    inner();
  }
}
```

The compiler desugars it to something like:

```lox
class A {
  foo() {
    this.foo@0();
  }
}
```

Here, "foo@0" is all part of the method name. "0" is the ID of the class A, and
we use "@" as a separator to ensure the generated name can't collide with a real
method name. At runtime, when a subclass inherits from a superclass, we copy
down all of the superclass's methods as before. That doesn't change. But when
the subclass then defines its *own* methods, we do some extra work.

Before storing the method in the subclass's method table, we look for an
existing method with that name. If we find one, it means an "outer" method with
that name already exists on some superclass. In that case, this subclass method
definition must become an inner method and thus we need to change its name. But
to what?

We know we need to append a class ID, but it's not clear which one. We extend
ObjClass to store its ID. We also extend ObjClosure to store the class ID of the
class where the method is declared. (We could make a separate ObjMethod type for
this, but I was lazy and put it in ObjClosure even though its only used for
closures that are method bodies.)

When defining a new method in a subclass, if we see a method with that name in
the table already, then that method is the outermost method that the subclass's
method is an inner method for. So we look at the class ID of the method already
in the table, and then generate a new name for the new method that includes
that class ID. So in:

```lox
class A { // ID 0.
  foo() {
    inner();
  }
}

class B < A { // ID 1.
  foo() {}
}
```

When we execute the `OP_METHOD` for `foo()` in B, we have already copied the
definition of `foo()` from A into B's method table. We see that collision. So we
look up the class ID stored in that closure and find 0. So then we change the
name of the method we're defining to `foo@0` instead.

We can't stop there. There may be multiple levels of `inner()` methods in
superclasses, so we look up `foo@0` in the method table too. If we find *that*
as well, then we look for *its* class ID. We keep looping like that walking
down the inheritance hierarchy until we eventually find an open slot that
corresponds to `inner()` on the lowest class in the hierarchy and slot our new
method there.

That's basically it. Since we already compile `inner()` calls to be method calls
on `this` with a correctly synthesized name, they will route to the right
method definition and behave as they should using the exist runtime code we
have for method dispatch.

The only missing piece is what happens when you call `inner()` in a class where
there is no subclass that refines it. We don't want to be a runtime error since
there's no way for a superclass to detect that. Instead, we treat it as if there
is an empty method that returns `nil`.

To implement that, I just made a new `OP_INNER` instruction to use instead of
`OP_INVOKE` for `inner()` calls. It behaves almost exactly like `OP_INVOKE`
except that in the case where no method could be found, instead of aborting, it
discards any argument stack slots and then pushes `nil`. Another option would
to actually compile default empty methods into the class, but then we'd have to
take care not to incorrectly inherit those and have them get in the way of real
calls.

For all the details, apply the diff to the code and see how it looks.
