On my 64-bit Mac laptop, it takes 16 bytes or 128 bits. That's quite a lot for a
pointer, a Boolean, and an enum with only eight cases (once we add the couple of
remaining ones for classes and instances).

In principle all we need is 64 bits for the pointer, 1 bit for the mark, and
3 bits for the type. And, in fact, most 64-bit operating systems don't give an
application a full 64 bits of address space. On x64 and ARM, a pointer will only
ever use 48 of those bits.

Also, the pointer in our Obj header points to another Obj whose first field is
also a pointer. When allocating memory for objects, the OS will align them to a
8-byte boundary. That implies the low three bits of the pointer will always be
zero and there's really only 45 meaningful bits of pointer data.

Thus, the minimum we really need is 49 bits: 45 for the pointer, 1 for the mark
bit, and 3 for the type enum. Because of alignment reasons, we won't be able to
get that all the way down, so we'll round it to 64 bits. If we leave the
pointer bits where they normal are in there, that leaves two empty bytes at the
top and a few empty bits at the bottom.

We'll store the type enum in the highest byte, the mark bit in the next byte,
and the next pointer in the remaining bits, like this:

```
00000000 00000000 01111111 11010110 01001111 01010000 00000000 01100000
Bit position:
66665555 55555544 44444444 33333333 33222222 22221111 11111100 00000000
32109876 54321098 76543210 98765432 10987654 32109876 54321098 76543210

Bits needed for pointer:
........ ........ |------- -------- -------- ------- --------- ----|...

Packing everything in:
.....TTT .......M NNNNNNNN NNNNNNNN NNNNNNNN NNNNNNNN NNNNNNNN NNNNNNNN

T = type enum, M = mark bit, N = next pointer.
```

To implement this, we'll replace the old fields in Obj with a single 64-bit int:

```c
struct sObj {
  uint64_t header;
};
```

Because the values are all bit-packed together, simple field access no longer
works. Instead, we'll write accessor functions to pull the right bits out and
convert them back to their desired representation:

```c
static inline ObjType objType(Obj* object) {
  return (ObjType)((object->header >> 56) & 0xff);
}

static inline bool isMarked(Obj* object) {
  return (bool)((object->header >> 48) & 0x01);
}

static inline Obj* objNext(Obj* object) {
  return (Obj*)(object->header & 0x0000ffffffffffff);
}
```

They're fairly straightforward. Each uses a bitwise and with a constant to mask
off and clear the bits for the *other* fields, then shifts the remaining bits
down to where they belong for the desired type. For the next pointer, we don't
need to shift anything.

Setting the fields a little more complex:

```c
static inline void setIsMarked(Obj* object, bool isMarked) {
  object->header = (object->header & 0xff00ffffffffffff) |
      ((uint64_t)isMarked << 48);
}

static inline void setObjNext(Obj* object, Obj* next) {
  object->header = (object->header & 0xffff000000000000) |
      (uint64_t)next;
}
```

We need to clear out the old value of the field and store the updated bits. But
we also need to preserve the bits for the *other* fields. So this time we mask
and clear only the bits are updating and preserve the rest.

When an object is first created, the mark bit is clear, and we have a type and
next pointer, so we initialized it like:

```c
object->header = (unsigned long)vm.objects | (unsigned long)type << 56;
```

All that remains is to replace every use of the old fields in the VM with calls
to the above utility functions. That's mechanical so I won't write them all out
here. The end result is that we've cut the size of the object header in half.

There is some runtime expense when accessing fields now because of the masking
and shifting. The next pointer and mark bits are only used during GC, so that's
likely not a large impact. Accessing the object's type is potentially more of an
issue since that happens frequently during runtime. One option we could take is
to store the type bits down in the least significant bits and shift the next
pointer up. That would let us access the type just by bitmasking without needing
a shift.
