The basic idea is that instead of clearing the mark bit of every live object,
we simply redefine their current value to mean "not marked". In other words,
instead of "true" always meaning "marked", after each cycle, we toggle which
Boolean value represents the marked state. Since every live object will have
the previous version's mark value, toggling the definition of marked instantly
sets them all to unmarked.

The implementation is fairly straightforward. In the VM struct, we add a new
field to store the Boolean value that currently means "marked":

```c
  bool markValue;
```

In `initVM()`, we initialize that to some value (it doesn't matter which):

```c
  vm.markValue = true;
```

Over in `sObj`, we rename the mark field from `isMarked` to `mark` to make it
clearer that `true` doesn't necessarily mean it's marked:

```
  bool mark;
```

Then we go through all of the code that uses `isMarked` and update it to the
new semantics:


```diff
 static Obj* allocateObject(size_t size, ObjType type) {
   Obj* object = (Obj*)reallocate(NULL, 0, size);
   object->type = type;
-  object->isMarked = false;
+  object->mark = !vm.markValue;

   object->next = vm.objects;
   vm.objects = object;
```

A new object starts off unmarked, so we initialize `mark` to the opposite of
the value that means "marked".

```diff
 void markObject(Obj* object) {
   if (object == NULL) return;
-  if (object->isMarked) return;
+  if (object->mark == vm.markValue) return;
```

To see if an object is marked, we compare its mark value to the VM's. If they
are the same, the object is marked.

Otherwise, we mark it like so:

```diff
-  object->isMarked = true;
+  object->mark = vm.markValue;
```

When removing the weak references from the string table, we also check the mark
bit:

```diff
 void tableRemoveWhite(Table* table) {
   for (int i = 0; i < table->capacity; i++) {
     Entry* entry = &table->entries[i];
-    if (entry->key != NULL && !entry->key->obj.isMarked) {
+    if (entry->key != NULL && entry->key->obj.mark != vm.markValue) {
       tableDelete(table, entry->key);
     }
   }
```

Over in `sweep()`, we compare against the VM's mark value to check each object's
mark state:

```diff
   Obj* previous = NULL;
   Obj* object = vm.objects;
   while (object != NULL) {
-    if (object->isMarked) {
-      object->isMarked = false;
+    if (object->mark == vm.markValue) {
       previous = object;
       object = object->next;
     } else {
```

The whole point of this change is that other removed line. We no longer need to
clear the mark bit on each live object.

Finally, when `collectGarbage()` completes, we flip which value means "marked":

```diff
   sweep();

   vm.nextGC = vm.bytesAllocated * GC_HEAP_GROW_FACTOR;
-
+  vm.markValue = !vm.markValue;
```

This way, every object's current mark value now means "unmarked". OK, so what's
the performance gain here? On my laptop, with one little microbenchmark...
almost none. It was slightly faster, but small enough to be within the noise.
Does that mean this is a bad technique? It's hard to say. It might make a bigger
difference on other benchmarks or other machines.
