In Ruby, if you access an instance variable that you never defined, you silently
get `nil` in return. It's as if the object has all fields and they are
implicitly initialized to `nil` for you.

If you want to explicitly check to see if an instance variable is defined, you
can call a special `instance_variable_defined?()` method on the object, passing
in the name of the instance variable as a string or symbol:

```ruby
some_object.instance_variable_defined?("field_name")
```

JavaScript works somewhat like Ruby. If you access a property on an object that
was never set, you get an implicit sentinel value back. To make things more
confusing, JavaScript has *two* special "absent" values: `null` and `undefined`.
When you access an undefined field, you get `undefined` back. You can think of
`null` as the "application-level" absent value that users can define to mean
what they want in their program. `undefined` is more like a "system-level"
absent value that gets returned from some built-in language semantics like
accessing an undefined field.

To tell if a property is present on the object, you can call `hasOwnProperty()`
on it, passing in the name of the property as a string.

Python takes a stricter approach. Accessing a non-existent object attribute
throws an exception. You can catch this if you want to handle the absent field
directly. To determine whether a field exists *before* an exception gets thrown,
you can a special top-level function `hasattr()`, passing in the object in
question and the name of the attribute.

In statically-typed languages, of course, it is a compile-time error to access
a field on defined for an object.

In other words, there are basically two dynamic approaches to handling accessing
undefined fields:

1. Return a special sentinel value like `nil`.
2. Produce a runtime error.

For Lox, the former feels too loose to me. Lox is generally stricter around
things like missing function arguments, and I think it should be strict here
too. At the same time, Lox lacks exceptions or a way for user to handle runtime
errors so we need to take that into account.

If users have a way to *detect* an absent field before trying to access it,
then it's fine for the language to abort on undefined field access -- users can
avoid that by checking beforehand. So I think that's the approach I'd take for
Lox.

We'll add a global `hasField()` native function that takes an instance and a
field name and returns `true` if the field is defined on the instance. Here is
an implementation:

```c
static Value hasFieldNative(int argCount, Value* args) {
  if (argCount != 2) return FALSE_VAL;
  if (!IS_INSTANCE(args[0])) return FALSE_VAL;
  if (!IS_STRING(args[1])) return FALSE_VAL;

  ObjInstance* instance = AS_INSTANCE(args[0]);
  Value dummy;
  return BOOL_VAL(tableGet(&instance->fields, AS_STRING(args[1]), &dummy));
}
```

The error-checking at the top is lame. Right now, the VM doesn't support
native functions producing runtime errors, so it just returns `false` if you
pass invalid arguments. Ideally, those would be runtime errors.

We define it when the VM starts up by adding this to `initVM()`:

```c
  defineNative("hasField", hasFieldNative);
```
