I am actually iffy on whether a language should allow this, or at least whether
it should make accessing fields using imperatively-built strings should be
*easy*.

That's really something like a metaprogramming feature. Users are writing code
that builds almost a tiny piece of "code" -- a field name -- and then executing
that. Metaprogramming is useful, but I think it should be clear to users when
they are doing it.

JavaScript tried to merge instances and data structures into a single "object"
concept and the result was a mess. People would try to use normal JavaScript
objects as hash tables, which JS encourages by putting a `[]` operator right on
objects that let you pass in string for field names. Then they would get very
surprised when their "hash table" happened to contain "keys" like `toString`.

I think it's better to keep objects and data structures stratified, and likewise
to keep regular programming and metaprogramming clearly distinguished. That
said, I do think it's useful to offer metaprogramming.

A simple way to offer the functionality but make users go out of their way to
get it is by using a top-level function instead of hanging some kind of operator
syntax right off the instance. (An even more explicit approach is to put those
functions in a separate "reflection" module users have to import, but Lox
doesn't have any modularity story.)

So let's add two new functions `getField()` and `setField()`. The first takes
an instance and a field name string. The second takes those plus a value to
store.

They are implemented like so:

```c
static Value getFieldNative(int argCount, Value* args) {
  if (argCount != 2) return FALSE_VAL;
  if (!IS_INSTANCE(args[0])) return FALSE_VAL;
  if (!IS_STRING(args[1])) return FALSE_VAL;

  ObjInstance* instance = AS_INSTANCE(args[0]);
  Value value;
  tableGet(&instance->fields, AS_STRING(args[1]), &value);
  return value;
}

static Value setFieldNative(int argCount, Value* args) {
  if (argCount != 3) return FALSE_VAL;
  if (!IS_INSTANCE(args[0])) return FALSE_VAL;
  if (!IS_STRING(args[1])) return FALSE_VAL;

  ObjInstance* instance = AS_INSTANCE(args[0]);
  tableSet(&instance->fields, AS_STRING(args[1]), args[2]);
  return args[2];
}
```

Like I said in answer #1, the error-handling in these is lame. Ideally, they
would abort with a runtime error if the arguments were incorrect.

Likewise, calling `getField()` when the instance doesn't have that field should
be a runtime error, but here is just returns `nil`.

These get declared as top level functions by adding this to `initVM()`:

```c
  defineNative("getField", getFieldNative);
  defineNative("setField", setFieldNative);
```
