Ruby provides a private method, `remove_instance_variable` that an object can
call on itself passing in the name of the instance vairable to delete. Ruby is
interesting in that it has the model that accessing an undefined instance
variable returns `nil`. But it it still makes a distinction between a deleted
instance variable and an instance variable whose value has been set to `nil`.
If you use `defined?` to tell if the instance variable exists, one whose value
is `nil` does exist, while a deleted one does not.

Lua has, I think, a more consistent model. Accessing a non-existent table key
-- Lua's rough analogue to fields -- returns `nil`. And there is no special way
to delete a table key. You just set its value to `nil`.

Python does not treat absent attributes as equivalent to `None`. Accessing an
attribute that does not exist throws an exception. To remove an attribute, you
can use the built `del` statement:

```python
del obj.some_attribute
```

In my answer for #1, I felt Lox should go with a stricter approach like Python.
That suggests we shouldn't use setting a field to `nil` to delete it. Instead,
following the previous two answers, we'll add another top level native function:

```c
static Value deleteFieldNative(int argCount, Value* args) {
  if (argCount != 2) return NIL_VAL;
  if (!IS_INSTANCE(args[0])) return NIL_VAL;
  if (!IS_STRING(args[1])) return NIL_VAL;

  ObjInstance* instance = AS_INSTANCE(args[0]);
  tableDelete(&instance->fields, AS_STRING(args[1]));
  return NIL_VAL;
}
```

And wire it up in `initVM()`:

```c
  defineNative("deleteField", deleteFieldNative);
```

Honestly, I don't think this is a great user experience. Lox makes it very
easy and natural to add a field, so it's weird to have to call a native function
and pass in the field as a string in order to remove one.

If I were making a full language, I would consider some built-in syntax for
removing a field. On the other hand, removing a field is a pretty strange, rare
operation. In most object-oriented programs, the set of fields an object has is
essentially fixed, even in dynamically-typed ones.
