^title Control Flow
^part A Tree-Walk Interpreter

> Logic, like whiskey, loses its beneficial effect when taken in too large
> quantities.
>
> <cite>Edward John Moreton Drax Plunkett, Lord Dunsany</cite>

Compared to [last chapter][statements]&rsquo;s grueling marathon, today is a
lighthearted frolic through a daisy meadow. But while the work is easy, the
reward is surprisingly large.

[statements]: statements-and-state.html

Right now, our interpreter is little more than a calculator. A Lox program can
only do a fixed amount of work before completing. To make it run twice as long
you have to make the source code twice as lengthy. We're about to fix that. In
this chapter, our interpreter takes a big step toward the programming
language major leagues: *Turing-completeness*.

## Turing Machines (Briefly)

In the early part of last century, mathematicians stumbled into a series of
confusing <span name="paradox">paradoxes</span> that led them to doubt the
stability of the foundation they built their work upon. To address that
[crisis][], they went back to square one. Starting from a handful of axioms,
logic, and set theory, they hoped to rebuild mathematics on top of an
impenetrable foundation.

[crisis]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foundations_of_mathematics#Foundational_crisis

<aside name="paradox">

The most famous of those is [**Russell's paradox**][russell]. Initially, set
theory allowed you to define any sort of set. If you could describe it in English,
it was valid. Naturally, given mathematicians' predilection for self reference,
sets can contain other sets. So Russell, rascal that he was, came up with:

*R is the set of all sets that do not contain themselves.*

Does R contain itself? If it doesn't, then according to the second half of the
definition it should. But if it does, then it no longer meets the definition.
Cue mind exploding.

[russell]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russell%27s_paradox

</aside>

They wanted to rigorously answer questions like, "Can all true statements be
proven?", "Can we [compute][] all functions that we can define?", or even the
more general question, "What do we mean when we claim a function is
'computable'?".

[compute]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computable_function

They hoped the answer to the first two questions would be "yes". All that
remained was to prove it. It turns out that the answer to both is "no" and,
astonishingly, the two questions are deeply intertwined. This is a fascinating
corner of mathematics that touches fundamental questions about what brains are
able to do and how the universe works. I can't do it justice here.

What I do want to note is that in the process of proving that those questions
are false, Alan Turing and Alonzo Church devised a precise answer to the last
question -- a definition of what kinds of functions are <span
name="uncomputable">computable</span>. They each crafted a tiny system with a
minimum set of machinery that is still powerful enough to compute any of a
(very) large class of functions.

<aside name="uncomputable">

They proved the answer to the first question is "no" by showing that the
function that returns the truth value of a given statement is *not* a computable
one.

</aside>

These are now considered the "computable functions". Turing's system is called a
<span name="turing">**Turing machine**</span>. Church's is the **lambda
calculus**. Both are still widely used as the basis for models of computation
and, in fact, many modern functional programming languages use the lambda
calculus at their core.

<aside name="turing">

Turing called his inventions "a-machines" for "automatic". He wasn't so
self-aggrandizing to put his *own* name on them. Later mathematicians did that
for him. That's how you get famous while still retaining some modesty.

</aside>

<img src="image/control-flow/turing-machine.png" alt="A Turing machine." />

Turing machines have better name recognition -- there's no Hollywood film about
Alonzo Church yet -- but the two formalisms are [equivalent in power][thesis].
In fact, any programming language with some minimal level of expressiveness is
powerful enough to compute *any* computable function.

[thesis]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church%E2%80%93Turing_thesis

You can prove that by writing a simulator for a Turing machine in your language.
Since Turing proved his machine can compute any computable function, by
extension, that means your language can too. All you need to do is translate the
function into a Turing machine, and then run that on your simulator.

If your language is expressive enough to do that, it's considered
**Turing-complete**. Turing machines are pretty dang simple, so it doesn't take
much power to do this. You basically need arithmetic, a little control flow,
and the ability to allocate and use (theoretically) arbitrary amounts of memory.
We've got the first. By the end of this chapter, we'll have the <span
name="memory">second</span>.

<aside name="memory">

We *almost* have the third too. You can create and concatenate strings of
arbitrary size, so you can *store* unbounded memory. But we don't have any way
to access parts of a string.

</aside>

## Conditional Execution

Enough history, let's jazz up our language. We can divide control flow roughly
into two kinds:

*   **Conditional** or **branching** control flow is used to *not* execute
    some piece of code. Imperatively, you can think of it as jumping *ahead*
    over a region of code.

*   **Looping** control flow executes a chunk of code more than once. It jumps
    *back* so that you can do something again. Since you don't usually want
    *infinite* loops, it typically has some conditional logic to know when to
    stop looping as well.

Branching is simpler, so we'll start there. C-derived languages have two main
conditional execution features, the if statement and the perspicaciously named
"conditional" <span name="ternary">operator</span> (`? :`). An if statement lets
you conditionally execute statements and the conditional operator lets you
conditionally execute expressions.

<aside name="ternary">

The conditional operator is also called the "ternary" operator because it's the
only operator in C that takes three operands.

</aside>

For simplicity's sake, Lox doesn't have a conditional operator, so let's get our
if statement on. It gets a new production under the statement grammar rule:

<span name="semicolon"></span>

```lox
statement → exprStmt
          | ifStmt
          | printStmt
          | block ;

ifStmt    → "if" "(" expression ")" statement ( "else" statement )? ;
```

<aside name="semicolon">

The semicolons in the rules aren't quoted, which means they are part of the
grammar metasyntax, not Lox's syntax. A block does not have a `;` at the end and
an if statement doesn't either unless the then or else statement happens to be
one that ends in a semicolon.

</aside>

An if statement has an expression for the condition then a statement to execute
if the condition is truthy. Optionally, it may also have an `else` keyword and a
statement to execute if the condition is falsey. The <span name="if-ast">syntax
tree node</span> has fields for each of those three pieces:

^code if-ast (1 before, 1 after)

<aside name="if-ast">

The generated code for the new node is in [Appendix II][appendix-if].

[appendix-if]: appendix-ii.html#if-statement

</aside>

Like other statements, the parser recognizes an if statement by the leading `if`
keyword:

^code match-if (1 before, 1 after)

When it finds one, it calls this to parse the rest:

^code if-statement

<aside name="parens">

The parentheses around the condition are only half useful. You need some kind of
delimiter *between* the condition and the then statement, otherwise the parser
can't tell when it has reached the end of the condition expression. But the
*opening* parenthesis after `if` doesn't do anything useful. Dennis Ritchie put
it there so he could use `)` as the ending delimiter without having unbalanced
parentheses.

Other languages like Lua and some BASICs use a keyword like `then` as the ending
delimiter and don't have anything before the condition. Go and Swift instead
require the statement to be a braced block. That lets them use the `{` at the
beginning of the statement to tell when the condition is done.

</aside>

As usual, the parsing code hews closely to the grammar. It detects an else
clause by looking for the preceding `else` keyword. If there isn't one, the
`elseBranch` field in the syntax tree is `null`.

That seemingly innocuous optional else has in fact opened up an ambiguity in our
grammar. Consider:

```lox
if (first) if (second) whenTrue(); else whenFalse();
```

Here's the riddle: Which if statement does that else clause belong to? This
isn't just a theoretical question about how we notate our grammar. It actually
affects how the code executes.

*   If we attach the else to the first if statement, then `whenFalse()` is
    called if `first` is falsey, regardless of what value `second` has.

*   If we attach it to the second if statement, then `whenFalse()` is only
    called if `first` is truthy and `second` is falsey.

Since else clauses are optional, and there is no explicit delimiter marking the
end of the if statement, the grammar is ambiguous when you nest ifs in this way.
This classic pitfall of syntax is called the **"[dangling else][]&rdquo;**
problem.

[dangling else]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dangling_else

<span name="else"></span>

<img class="above" src="image/control-flow/dangling-else.png" alt="Two ways the else can be interpreted.">

<aside name="else">

Here, formatting highlights the two ways the else could be parsed. But note that
since whitespace characters are ignored by the parser, this is only a guide to
the human reader.

</aside>

It *is* possible to define a context-free grammar that avoids the ambiguity
directly, but it requires splitting most of the statement rules into pairs, one
that allows an if with an else and one that doesn't. It's annoying.

Instead, most languages and parsers avoid the problem in an ad hoc way. No
matter what hack they use to get themselves out of the trouble, they always
choose the same interpretation -- the else is bound to the nearest if that
precedes it.

Our parser conveniently does that already. Since `ifStatement()` eagerly looks
for an `else` before returning, the innermost call to a nested series will claim
the else clause for itself before returning to the outer if statements.

Syntax in hand, we are ready to interpret:

^code visit-if

The implementation is merely a thin wrapper around the self-same Java code. It
evaluates the condition. If it's truthy, it executes the then branch. Otherwise,
if there is an else branch, it executes that.

If you compare this code to how the interpreter handles other syntax we've
implemented, the part that makes control flow special is that Java if statement.
Most other syntax trees always evaluate their subtrees. Here, we may not
evaluate the then or else statement. If either of those has a side effect, the
choice not to evaluate it becomes user-visible.

## Logical Operators

Since we don't have the conditional operator, you might think we're done with
branching, but no. Even without the ternary operator, there are two other
operators that are technically control flow constructs -- the logical operators
`and` and `or`.

These aren't like other binary operators because they **short-circuit**. If,
after evaluating the left operand, we know what the result of the logical
expression must be, we don't evaluate the right operand. For example:

```lox
false and sideEffect();
```

For an and expression to evaluate to something truthy, both operands must be
truthy. We can see as soon as we evaluate the left `false` operand that that
isn't going to be the case, so there's no need to evaluate `sideEffect()` and so
it gets skipped.

This is why we didn't implement the logical operators with the other binary
operators. Now we're ready. The two new operators are low in the precedence
table. Similar to `||` and `&&` in C, they each have their <span
name="logical">own</span> precedence with `or` lower than `and`. We slot them
right between `assignment` and `equality`:

<aside name="logical">

I've always wondered why they don't have the same precedence like the various
comparison or equality operators do.

</aside>

```lox
expression → assignment ;
assignment → identifier "=" assignment
           | logic_or ;
logic_or   → logic_and ( "or" logic_and )* ;
logic_and  → equality ( "and" equality )* ;
```

Instead of falling back to `equality`, `assignment` now cascades to `logic_or`.
The two new rules, `logic_or` and `logic_and`, are <span
name="same">similar</span> to other binary operators. Then `logic_and` calls
out to `equality` for its operands, and we chain back to the rest of the
expression rules.

<aside name="same">

The *syntax* doesn't care that they short-circuit. That's a semantic concern.

</aside>

We could reuse the existing Expr.Binary class for these two new expressions
since they have the same fields. But then `visitBinaryExpr()` would have to
check to see if the operator is one of the logical operators and use a different
code path to handle the short circuiting. I think it's cleaner to define a <span
name="logical-ast">new class</span> for these operators so that they get their
own visit method.

^code logical-ast (1 before, 1 after)

<aside name="logical-ast">

The generated code for the new node is in [Appendix II][appendix-logical].

[appendix-logical]: appendix-ii.html#logical-expression

</aside>

To weave the new expressions into the parser, we first change the parsing code
for assignment to call `or()`:

^code or-in-assignment (1 before, 2 after)

The code to parse a series of or expressions mirrors other binary operators:

^code or

Its operands are the next higher level of precedence, the new and expression:

^code and

That calls `equality()` for its operands and now it's all tied back together
again. We're ready to interpret it:

^code visit-logical

If you compare this to the [earlier chapter's][evaluating] `visitBinaryExpr()`
method, you can see the difference. Here, we evaluate the left operand first. We
look at its value to see if we can short circuit. If not, and only then, do we
evaluate the right operand.

[evaluating]: evaluating-expressions.html

The other interesting piece here is deciding what actual value to return. Since
Lox is dynamically typed, we allow operands of any type and use truthiness to
determine what each operand represents. We apply similar reasoning to the
result. Instead of promising to literally return `true` or `false`, a logic
operator merely guarantees it will return a value with appropriate truthiness.

Fortunately, we have values with proper truthiness right at hand -- the results
of the operands itself. So we use those. For example:

```lox
print "hi" or 2; // "hi".
print nil or "yes"; // "yes".
```

On the first line, `"hi"` is truthy, so the `or` short-circuits and returns
that. On the second line, `nil` is falsey, so it evaluates and returns the
second operand, `"yes"`.

That covers all of the branching primitives in Lox. We're ready to jump ahead to
loops. You see what I did there? *Jump. Ahead.* Get it? See, it's like a
reference to... oh, forget it.

## While Loops

Lox features two looping control flow statements, while and for. While is the
simpler one so we'll start there. Its grammar is the same as in C:

```lox
statement → exprStmt
          | ifStmt
          | printStmt
          | whileStmt
          | block ;

whileStmt → "while" "(" expression ")" statement ;
```

We add another clause to the statement rule that points to the new rule for
while. It takes a `while` keyword, followed by a parenthesized condition
expression, then a statement for the body.

The new grammar rule gets its own <span name="while-ast">syntax tree
node</span>:

^code while-ast (1 before, 1 after)

<aside name="while-ast">

The generated code for the new node is in [Appendix II][appendix-while].

[appendix-while]: appendix-ii.html#while-statement

</aside>

It stores the condition and body. Here you can see why it's nice to have
separate base classes for expressions and statements. The field declarations
make it clear that the condition is an expression and the body is a statement.

Over in the parser, we follow the same process we did for if. First, we add
another case in `statement()` to detect and match the leading keyword:

^code match-while (1 before, 1 after)

That delegates the real work to:

^code while-statement

The grammar is dead simple and this is a straight translation of it to Java.
Speaking of translating straight to Java, here's how we execute the new syntax:

^code visit-while

Like the visit method for if, it uses the corresponding Java feature. The code
isn't complex, but it makes Lox much more powerful now. We can finally write a
program whose running time isn't strictly bound by the length of the source
code.

## For Loops

We're down to the last control flow construct, <span name="for">Ye Olde</span>
C-style for loop. I probably don't need to remind you, but it looks like this:

```lox
for (var i = 0; i < 10; i = i + 1) print i;
```

In grammarese, that's:

```lox
statement → exprStmt
          | forStmt
          | ifStmt
          | printStmt
          | whileStmt
          | block ;

forStmt   → "for" "(" ( varDecl | exprStmt | ";" )
                      expression? ";"
                      expression? ")" statement ;
```

<aside name="for">

Most modern languages have a higher-level looping statement for iterating over
arbitrary user-defined sequences. C# has `foreach`, Java has "enhanced for",
even C++ has range-based for statements now. Those offer cleaner syntax than C's
for statement by implicitly calling into an iteration protocol that the object
being looped over supports.

Those are great. For Lox, though, we're limited by building up the interpreter a
chapter at a time. We don't have objects and methods yet, so we have no way of
defining an iteration protocol that the for loop could use. So we'll stick with
the old school C for loop. Think of it as "vintage". The fixie of control flow
statements.

</aside>

Inside the parentheses, you have three clauses separated by semicolons:

1.  The first clause is the *initializer*. It is executed exactly once, before
    anything else. It's usually an expression, but for convenience, we also
    allow a variable declaration. In that case, the variable is scoped to the
    rest of the for loop -- the other two clauses and the body.

2.  Next is the *condition*. As in a while loop, this expression controls when
    to exit the loop. It's evaluated once at the beginning of each iteration,
    including the first. If the result is truthy, it executes the loop body.
    Otherwise, it bails.

3.  The last clause is the *increment*. It's an arbitrary expression that does
    some work at the end of each loop iteration. The result of the expression is
    discarded, so it must have a side effect to be useful. In practice, it's
    usually incrementing and assigning a variable.

Any of these clauses can be omitted. Following the clauses is a statement for
the body.

### Desugaring

That's a lot of machinery, but note that none of it does anything you couldn't
do with the statements we already have. If for loops didn't support initializer
clauses, you could just put the initializer expression before the for statement.
If it didn't have an increment clause, you could simply put the increment
expression at the end of the body yourself.

In other words, Lox doesn't *need* for loops, they just make some common code
patterns more pleasant to write. These kinds of features are called <span
name="sugar">**syntactic sugar**</span>. For example, the previous for loop
could be rewritten to:

<aside name="sugar">

This delighful turn of phrase was coined by Peter J. Landin in 1964 to describe
how some of the nice expression forms supported by languages like ALGOL were a
sugaring over the more fundamental, yet presumably less palatable lambda
calculus underneath.

<img class="above" src="image/control-flow/sugar.png" alt="Slightly more than a spoonful of sugar.">

</aside>

```lox
{
  var i = 0;
  while (i < 10) {
    print i;
    i = i + 1;
  }
}
```

That has the exact same semantics, though it's certainly not as easy on the
eyes. Reducing syntactic sugar to semantically equivalent but more verbose forms
is called <span name="caramel">**desugaring**</span>. We'll use this technique
inside our interpreter. Instead of directly interpreting for loops, the parser
will consume the new syntax and translate it to more primitive forms that the
interpreter already knows how to execute.

<aside name="caramel">

Oh, how I wish the accepted term for this was "caramelization". Why introduce a
metaphor if you aren't going to stick with it?

</aside>

It's not saving us a ton of work in this tiny interpreter, but desugaring is a
powerful tool to have in your toolbox and this gives me an excuse to show it to
you. In a sophisticated implementation, the backend does lots of work optimizing
each supported chunk of semantics. The fewer of those there are, the more
mileage it gets out of each optimization.

Meanwhile, a rich syntax makes the language more pleasant and productive to work
in. Desugaring bridges that gap -- it lets you take a robust expressive grammar
and cook it down to a small number of primitives that the back end can do its
magic on.

So, unlike the previous statements, we *won't* add a new syntax tree node.
Instead, we go straight to parsing. First, add an import we'll need soon:

^code import-arrays (1 before, 1 after)

Like every statement, we start parsing a for loop by matching its keyword:

^code match-for (1 before, 1 after)

Here is where it gets interesting. The desugaring is going to happen here, so
we'll build this method a piece at a time, starting with the opening parenthesis
before the clauses.

^code for-statement

The first clause following that is the initializer:

^code for-initializer (2 before, 1 after)

If the token following the `(` is a semicolon then the initializer has been
omitted. Otherwise, we check for a `var` keyword to see if it's a <span
name="variable">variable</span> declaration. If neither of those matched, it
must be an expression. We parse that and wrap it in an expression statement so
that the initializer is always of type Stmt.

<aside name="variable">

In a previous chapter, I said we can split expression and statement syntax trees
into two separate class hierarchies because there's no single place in the
grammar that allows both an expression and a statement. That wasn't *entirely*
true, I guess.

</aside>

Next up is the condition:

^code for-condition (2 before, 1 after)

Again, we look for a semicolon to see if the clause has been omitted. The last
clause is the increment:

^code for-increment (1 before, 1 after)

It's similar to the condition clause except this one is terminated by the
closing parenthesis. All that remains is the <span name="body">body</span>:

<aside name="body">

Is it just me or does that sound morbid? "All that remained... was the *body."*

</aside>

^code for-body (1 before, 1 after)

Something is clearly missing. What about all of the clauses we parsed? This is
where the desugaring comes in. We'll take those and use them to synthesize
syntax tree nodes that express the semantics of the for loop, like the
hand-desugared example I showed you earlier.

The code is a little simpler if we work backwards, so we start with the
increment clause:

^code for-desugar-increment (2 before, 1 after)

The increment, if there is one, executes after the body in each iteration of the
loop. We do that by replacing the body with a little block that contains the
original body followed by an expression statement that evaluates the increment.

^code for-desugar-condition (2 before, 1 after)

Next, we take the condition and the body and build the loop using a primitive
while loop. If the condition is omitted, we jam in `true` to make an infinite
loop.

^code for-desugar-initializer (2 before, 1 after)

Finally, if there is an initializer, it runs once before the entire loop. We do
that by, again, replacing the whole statement with a block that runs the
initializer and then executes the loop.

That's it. Our interpreter now supports C-style for loops and we didn't have to
touch the Interpreter class at all. Since we desugared to nodes it already knows
how to visit, there is no more work to do.

Finally, Lox is powerful enough to entertain us, at least for a few minutes.
Here's a tiny program to print the first 21 elements in the Fibonacci
sequence:

```lox
var a = 0;
var b = 1;

while (a < 10000) {
  print a;
  var temp = a;
  a = b;
  b = temp + b;
}
```

<div class="challenges">

## Challenges

1.  A few chapters from now, when Lox supports first-class functions and dynamic
    dispatch, then we technically won't *need* branching statements built into
    the language. Show how conditional execution can be implemented in terms of
    those. Name a language that uses this technique for its control flow.

2.  Likewise, looping can be implemented using those same tools, provided our
    interpreter supports an important optimization. What is it, and why is it
    necessary? Name a language that uses this technique for iteration.

3.  Unlike Lox, most other C-style languages also support break and continue
    statements inside loops. Add support for break statements.

    The syntax is a `break` keyword followed by a semicolon. It should be a
    syntax error to have a break statement appear outside of any enclosing loop.
    At runtime, a break statement causes execution to jump to the end of the
    nearest enclosing loop and proceeds from there. Note that the break may be
    nested inside other blocks and if statements that also need to be exited.

</div>

<div class="design-note">

## Design Note: Spoonfuls of Syntactic Sugar

When you design your own language, you choose how much syntactic sugar to pour
into the grammar. Do you make an unsweetened health food where each semantic
operation maps to a single syntactic unit, or some decadent dessert where every
bit of behavior can be expressed ten different ways? Successful languages
inhabit all points along this continuum.

On the extreme acrid end are those with ruthlessly minimal syntax like Lisp,
Forth, and Smalltalk. Lispers famously claim their language "has no syntax",
while Smalltalkers proudly show that you can fit the entire grammar on an index
card. This tribe has the philosophy that the *language* doesn't need syntactic
sugar. Instead, the minimal syntax and semantics it provides are powerful enough
to let library code be as expressive as if it were part of the language itself.

Near these are languages like C, Lua, and Go. They aim for simplicity and
clarity over minimalism. Some, like Go, deliberately eschew both syntactic sugar
and the kind of syntactic extensibility of the previous category. They want the
syntax to get out of the way of the semantics, so they focus on keeping both the
grammar and libraries simple. Code should be obvious more than beautiful.

Somewhere in the middle you have languages like Java, C# and Python. Eventually
you reach Ruby, C++, Perl, and D, languages which have stuffed so much syntax
into their grammar, they are running out of punctuation characters on the
keyboard.

To some degree, location on the spectrum correlates with age. It's relatively
easy to add bits of syntactic sugar in later releases. New syntax is a crowd
pleaser, and it's less likely to break existing programs than mucking with the
semantics. Once added, you can never take it away, so languages tend to sweeten
with time. One of the main benefits of creating a new language from scratch is
it gives you an opportunity to scrape off those accumulated layers of frosting
and start over.

Syntactic sugar has a bad rap among the PL intelligentsia. There's a real fetish
for minimalism in that crowd. There is some justification for that. Poorly
designed, unneeded syntax raises the cognitive load without adding enough
expressiveness to carry its weight. Since there is always pressure to cram new
features into the language, it takes discipline and a focus on simplicity to
avoid bloat. Once you add some syntax, you're stuck with it, so it's smart to be
parsimonious.

At the same time, most successful languages do have fairly complex grammars, at
least by the time they are widely used. Programmers spend a ton of time in their
language of choice, and a few niceties here and there really can improve the
comfort and efficiency of their work.

Striking the right balance -- choosing the right level of sweetness for your
language -- relies on your own sense of taste.

</div>
