^title Global Variables
^part A Bytecode Virtual Machine

> If only there could be an invention that bottled up a memory, like scent. And
> it never faded, and it never got stale. And then, when one wanted it, the
> bottle could be uncorked, and it would be like living the moment all over
> again.
>
> <cite>Daphne du Maurier, <em>Rebecca</em></cite>

The [previous chapter][hash] was a long exploration of one big, deep,
fundamental computer science data structure. Heavy on theory and concept. There
may have been some discussion of big-O notation and algorithms. This chapter has
fewer intellectual pretensions. There are no large ideas to learn. Instead, it's
a handful of straightforward engineering tasks. Once we've completed them, our
virtual machine will support variables.

Actually, it will only support *global* variables. Locals are coming in the
[next chapter][]. In jlox, we managed to cram them both into a single chapter,
because we used the same implementation technique for all variables. We built a
chain of environments, one for each scope, all the way up to the top. That was a
simple, clean way to learn how to manage state.

[next chapter]: local-variables.html

But it's also *slow*. Allocating a new hash table each time you enter a block or
call a function is not the road to a fast VM. Given how much code is concerned
with using variables, if variables go slow, everything goes slow. For clox,
we'll improve that by using a much more efficient strategy for <span
name="different">local</span> variables, but globals aren't as easily optimized.

<aside name="different">

This is a common meta-strategy in sophisticated language implementations. Often,
the same language feature will have multiple implementation techniques, each
tuned for different use patterns. For example, JavaScript VMs often have a
faster representation for objects that are used more like instances of classes
compared to other objects whose set of properties is more freely modified. C and
C++ compilers usually have a variety of ways to compile switch statements based
on the number of cases and how densely packed the case values are.

</aside>

[hash]: hash-tables.html

A quick refresher on Lox semantics: Global variables in Lox are "late bound" or
resolved dynamically. This means you can compile a chunk of code that refers to
a global variable before it's defined. As long as the code doesn't *execute*
before the definition happens, everything is fine. In practice, that means you
can refer to later variables inside the body of functions:

```lox
fun showVariable() {
  print global;
}

var global = "after";
showVariable();
```

Code like this might seem odd, but it's handy for defining mutually recursive
functions. It also plays nicer with the REPL. You can write a little function in
one line, then define the variable it uses in the next.

Local variables work differently. Since a local variable's declaration *always*
occurs before it is used, the VM can resolve them at compile time, even in a
simple single-pass compiler. That will let us use a smarter representation for
locals. But that's for the next chapter. Right now, let's just worry about
globals.

## Statements

Variables come into being using variable declarations, which means now is also
the time to add support for statements to our compiler. If you recall, Lox
splits statements into two categories. "Declarations" are those statements that
bind a new name to a value. The other kinds of statements -- control flow,
print, etc. -- are just called "statements". We disallow declarations directly
inside control flow statements, like this:

```lox
if (monday) var croissant = "yes"; // Error.
```

Allowing it would raise confusing questions around the scope of the variable.
So, like other languages, we prohibit it syntactically by having a separate
grammar rule for the subset of statements that *are* allowed inside a control
flow body:

```lox
statement      → exprStmt
               | forStmt
               | ifStmt
               | printStmt
               | returnStmt
               | whileStmt
               | block ;
```

Then we use a separate rule for the top level of a script and inside a block:

```lox
declaration    → classDecl
               | funDecl
               | varDecl
               | statement ;
```

The `declaration` rule contains the statements that declare names, and also
includes `statement` so that all statements types are allowed. Since `block`
itself is in `statement`, you can put declarations <span
name="parens">inside</span> a control flow construct by nesting them inside a
block.

<aside name="parens">

Blocks work sort of like parentheses do for expressions. A block lets you put
the "lower precedence" declaration statements in places where only a "higher
precedence" non-declaring statement is allowed.

</aside>

In this chapter, we'll only cover a couple of statements and one
declaration:

```lox
statement      → exprStmt
               | printStmt ;

declaration    → varDecl
               | statement ;
```

Up to now, our VM considered a "program" to be a single expression since that's
all we could parse and compile. In a real Lox program, a script is a sequence of
declarations. We're ready to support that now:

^code compile (1 before, 1 after)

We keep compiling declarations until we hit the end of the source file, using:

^code declaration

We'll get to variable declarations later in the chapter, so, for now, this just
forwards to `statement()`:

^code statement

Block statements can contain declarations and control flow statements contain
other statements. That means these two functions will eventually be recursive.
We may as well write out the forward declarations now:

^code forward-declarations (1 before, 1 after)

### Print statements

We have two statement types to support. Let's start with print statements, which
begin, naturally enough, with a `print` token. We detect that using this helper
function:

^code match

You may recognize it from jlox. If the current token has the given type, we
consume the token and return `true`. Otherwise we leave the token alone and
return `false`. This <span name="turtles">helper</span> function is implemented
in terms of this other helper:

<aside name="turtles">

It's helpers all the way down!

</aside>

^code check

The `check()` function returns `true` if the current token has the given type.
It seems a little <span name="read">silly</span> to wrap this in a function, but
we'll use it more later and I think short verb-named functions like this make
the parser easier to read.

<aside name="read">

This sounds trivial but hand-written parsers for non-toy languages get pretty
big. When you have thousands of lines of code, a utility function that turns two
lines into one and makes the result a little more readable easily earns its
keep.

</aside>

If we did match the `print` token, then we compile the rest of the statement
using:

^code print-statement

A print statement evaluates an expression and prints the result, so we first
parse and compile that expression. The grammar expects a semicolon after that,
so we consume it. Finally, we emit a new instruction to print the
result:

^code op-print (1 before, 1 after)

At runtime, we execute this instruction like so:

^code interpret-print (1 before, 1 after)

At this point, we have already executed the code for the expression and the
result value remains on top of the stack. Now we simply pop it and print it.

Note that we don't push anything else after that. This is a key difference
between expressions and statements in the VM. Every bytecode instruction has a
<span name="effect">**stack effect**</span> that describes how the instruction
modifies the stack. For example, `OP_ADD` pops two values and pushes one,
leaving the stack one element smaller than before.

<aside name="effect">

The stack is one element shorter after an `OP_ADD`, so its effect is -1:

<img src="image/global-variables/stack-effect.png" alt="The stack effect of an OP_ADD instruction." />

</aside>

You can also sum the stack effects of a series of instructions. When you add the
stack effects of any series of instructions compiled from an expression, it will
total one. Each expression leaves one result value on the stack.

The bytecode for an entire statement has a total stack effect of zero. Since a
statement produces no values, it ultimately leaves the stack unchanged, though
it of course uses the stack while it's doing its thing. This is important
because when we get to control flow and looping, a program might execute a long
series of statements. If each statement grew or shrank the stack, it might
eventually overflow or underflow.

While we're in the interpreter loop, we should delete a bit of code:

^code op-return (1 before, 1 after)

When the VM only compiled and evaluated a single expression, we had some
temporary code in `OP_RETURN` to output the value. Now that we have statements
and `print`, we don't need that anymore. We're one <span
name="return">step</span> closer to the complete implementation of clox.

<aside name="return">

We're only one step closer, though. We will revisit `OP_RETURN` again when we
add functions. Right now, it exits the entire interpreter loop.

</aside>

As usual, a new instruction needs support in the disassembler:

^code disassemble-print (1 before, 1 after)

That's our `print` statement. If you want, give it a whirl:

```lox
print 1 + 2;
print 3 * 4;
```

Exciting!

### Expression statements

Wait until you see the next statement. If we *don't* see a `print` keyword, then
we must be looking at an expression statement:

^code parse-expressions-statement (1 before, 1 after)

It's parsed like so:

^code expression-statement

An "expression statement" is simply an expression followed by a semicolon.
They're how you write an expression in a context where a statement is expected.
Usually, it's so that you can call a function or evaluate an assignment for its
side effect, like:

```lox
brunch = "quiche";
eat(brunch);
```

Semantically, an expression statement evaluates the expression and discards the
result. The compiler directly encodes that behavior. It emits the code for the
expression, and then an `OP_POP` instruction:

^code pop-op (1 before, 1 after)

As the name implies, that instruction pops the top value off the stack and
forgets it:

^code interpret-pop (1 before, 2 after)

We can disassemble it too:

^code disassemble-pop (1 before, 1 after)

Expression statements aren't very useful yet since we can't create any
expressions that have side effects, but they'll be essential when we [add
functions later][functions]. The <span name="majority">majority</span> of
statements in real-world code in languages like C are expression statements.

<aside name="majority">

By my count, 80 of the 149 statements (~53%), in the version of "compiler.c"
that we have at the end of the chapter are expression statements.

</aside>

[functions]: calls-and-functions.html

### Error synchronization

While we're getting this initial work done in the compiler, we can tie off a
loose end we left [several chapters back][errors]. Like jlox, clox uses panic
mode error recovery to minimize the number of cascaded compile errors that it
reports. The compiler exits panic mode when it reaches a synchronization point.
For Lox, we chose statement boundaries as that point. Now that we have
statements, we can implement synchronization:

[errors]: compiling-expressions.html#handling-syntax-errors

^code call-synchronize (1 before, 1 after)

If we hit a compile error while parsing the previous statement, we will enter
panic mode. In that case, after the statement, we start synchronizing:

^code synchronize

We skip tokens indiscriminately until we reach something that looks like a
statement boundary. We recognize the boundary by looking for a preceding token
that can end a statement, like a semicolon. Or we'll look for a subsequent token
that begins a statement, usually one of the control flow or declaration
keywords.

## Variable Declarations

Merely being able to *print* doesn't win your language any prizes at the
programming language <span name="fair">fair</span>, so let's move on to
something a little more ambitious and get variables going. There are three
operations we need to support:

<aside name="fair">

I can't help but imagine a "language fair" like some country 4H thing. Rows of
straw-lined stalls full of baby languages *moo*-ing and *baa*-ing at each other.

</aside>

*   Declaring a new variable using a `var` statement.
*   Accessing the value of a variable using an identifier expression.
*   Storing a new value in an existing variable using an assignment expression.

We can't do either of the last two until we have some variables, so we start
with declarations:

^code match-var (1 before, 2 after)

The placeholder parsing function we sketched out for the declaration grammar
rule has an actual production now. If we match a `var` token, we jump to:

^code var-declaration

The keyword is followed by the variable name. That's compiled by
`parseVariable()`, which we'll get to in a second. Then we look for an `=`
followed by an initializer expression. If the user doesn't initialize the
variable, the compiler implicitly initializes it to <span
name="nil">`nil`</span> by emitting an `OP_NIL` instruction. Either way, we
expect the statement to be terminated with a semicolon.

<aside name="nil" class="bottom">

Essentially, the compiler desugars a variable declaration like:

```lox
var a;
```

into:

```lox
var a = nil;
```

The code it generates for the former is identical to what it produces for the
latter.

</aside>

There are two new functions here for working with variables and identifiers. The
first one is:

^code parse-variable (2 before)

It requires the next token to be an identifier token, which it consumes and
sends to:

^code identifier-constant (2 before)

This function takes the given token and adds its lexeme to the chunk's constant
table as a string. It then returns the index of that constant in the constant
table.

Global variables are looked up *by name* at runtime. That means the VM -- the
bytecode interpreter loop -- needs access to the name. A whole string is too big
to stuff into the bytecode stream as an operand. Instead, we store the string in
the constant table and the instruction then refers to the name by its index in
the table.

This function returns that index all the way to `varDeclaration()` which later
hands it over to:

^code define-variable

<span name="helper">This</span> outputs the bytecode instruction that defines
the new variable and stores its initial value. The index of the variable's name
in the constant table is the instruction's operand. As usual in a stack-based
VM, we emit this instruction last. At runtime, we execute the code for the
variable's initializer first. That leaves the value on the stack. Then this
instruction takes that and stores it away for later.

<aside name="helper">

I know some of these functions seem pretty pointless right now. But we'll get
more mileage out of them as we add more language features for working with
names. Function and class declarations both declare new variables, and variable
and assignment expressions access them.

</aside>

Over in the runtime, we begin with this new instruction:

^code define-global-op (1 before, 1 after)

Thanks to our handy-dandy hash table, the implementation isn't too hard:

^code interpret-define-global (1 before, 2 after)

We get the name of the variable from the constant table. Then we <span
name="pop">take</span> the value from the top of the stack and store it in a
hash table with that name as the key.

<aside name="pop">

Note that we don't *pop* the value until *after* we add it to the hash table.
That ensures the VM can still find the value if a garbage collection is
triggered right in the middle of adding it to the hash table. That's a distinct
possibility since the hash table requires dynamic allocation when it resizes.

</aside>

This code doesn't check to see if the key is already in the table. Lox is pretty
lax with global variables and lets you redefine them without error. That's
useful in a REPL session, so the VM supports that by simply overwriting the
value if the key happens to already be in the hash table.

There's another little helper macro:

^code read-string (1 before, 2 after)

It reads a one-byte operand from the bytecode chunk. It treats that as an index
into the chunk's constant table and returns the string at that index. It doesn't
check that the value *is* a string -- it just indiscriminately casts it. That's
safe because the compiler never emits an instruction that refers to a non-string
constant.

Because we care about lexical hygiene, we also undefine this macro at the end of
the interpret function:

^code undef-read-string (1 before, 1 after)

I keep saying "the hash table", but we don't actually have one yet. We need a
place to store these globals. Since we want them to persist as long as clox is
running, we store them right in the VM:

^code vm-globals (1 before, 1 after)

As we did with the string table, we need to initialize the hash table to a valid
state when the VM boots up:

^code init-globals (1 before, 1 after)

And we should <span name="tear">tear</span> it down when we exit:

<aside name="tear">

The process will free everything on exit, but it feels undignified to require
the operating system to clean up our mess.

</aside>

^code free-globals (1 before, 1 after)

As usual, we want to be able to disassemble the new instruction too:

^code disassemble-define-global (1 before, 1 after)

And with that, we can define global variables. Not that users can *tell* that
they've done so, because they can't actually *use* them. So let's fix that next.

## Reading Variables

As in every programming language ever, we access a variable's value using its
name. We hook up identifier tokens to the expression parser here:

^code table-identifier (1 before, 1 after)

That calls:

^code variable-without-assign

Like with declarations, there are a couple of tiny helper functions that seem
pointless now but will become more useful in later chapters. I promise.

^code read-named-variable

This calls the same `identifierConstant()` function from before to take the
given identifier token and add its lexeme to the chunk's constant table as a
string. All that remains is to emit an instruction that loads the global
variable with that name. Here's the instruction:

^code get-global-op (1 before, 1 after)

Over in the bytecode interpreter, the implementation reflects
`OP_DEFINE_GLOBAL`:

^code interpret-get-global (1 before, 2 after)

We pull the constant table index from the instruction's operand and get the
variable name. Then we use that as a key to look up the variable's value in the
globals hash table.

If the key isn't present in the hash table, it means that global variable has
never been defined. That's a runtime error in Lox, so we report it and exit the
interpreter loop if that happens. Otherwise, we take the value and push it
onto the stack.

^code disassemble-get-global (1 before, 1 after)

A little bit of disassembling, and we're done. Our interpreter is up to running
code like this:

```lox
var beverage = "cafe au lait";
var breakfast = "beignets with " + beverage;
print breakfast;
```

There's only one operation left...

## Assignment

Throughout this book, I've tried to keep you on a fairly safe and easy path. I
don't avoid hard *problems*, but I try to not make the *solutions* more complex
than they need to be. Alas, other design choices in our <span
name="jlox">bytecode</span> compiler make assignment annoying to implement.

<aside name="jlox">

If you recall, assignment was pretty easy in jlox.

</aside>

Our bytecode VM uses a single-pass compiler. It parses and generates bytecode
on the fly without any intermediate AST. As soon as it recognizes a piece of
syntax, it emits code for it. Assignment doesn't naturally fit that. Consider:

```lox
menu.brunch(sunday).beverage = "mimosa";
```

In this code, the parser doesn't realize `menu.brunch(sunday).beverage` is the
target of an assignment and not a normal expression until it reaches `=`, many
tokens after the first `menu`. By then, the compiler has already emitted
bytecode for the whole thing.

The problem is not as dire as it might seem, though. Look at how the parser sees that example:

<img src="image/global-variables/setter.png" alt="The 'menu.brunch(sunday).beverage = &quot;mimosa&quot;' statement, showing that 'menu.brunch(sunday)' is an expression." />

Even though the `.beverage` part must not be compiled as a get expression,
everything to the left of the `.` is an expression, with the normal expression
semantics. The `menu.brunch(sunday)` part can be compiled and executed as usual.

Fortunately for us, the only semantic differences on the left side of an
assignment appear at the very right-most end of the tokens, immediately
preceding the `=`. Even though the receiver of a setter may be an arbitrarily
long expression, the part whose behavior differs from a get expression is only
the trailing identifier, which is right before the `=`. We don't need much
lookahead to realize `beverage` should be compiled as a set expression and not a
getter.

Variables are even easier since they are just a single bare identifier before an
`=`. The idea then is that right *before* compiling an expression that can also
be used as an assignment target, we look for a subsequent `=` token. If we see
one, we compile it as an assignment or setter instead of a variable access or
getter.

We don't have setters to worry about yet, so all we need to handle is variables:

^code named-variable (1 before, 1 after)

In the parse function for identifier expressions, we look for a following
equals sign. If we find one, instead of emitting code for a variable access,
we compile the assigned value and then emit an assignment instruction.

That's the last instruction we need to add in this chapter:

^code set-global-op (1 before, 1 after)

As you'd expect, its runtime behavior is similar to defining a new variable:

^code interpret-set-global (1 before, 2 after)

The main difference is what happens when the key doesn't already exist in the
globals hash table. If the variable hasn't been defined yet, it's a runtime
error to try to assign to it. Lox [doesn't do implicit variable
declaration][implicit].

<aside name="delete">

The call to `tableSet()` stores the value in the global variable table even if
the variable wasn't previously defined. That fact is visible in a REPL session,
since it keeps running even after the runtime error is reported. So we also take
care to delete that zombie value from the table.

</aside>

The other difference is that setting a variable doesn't pop the value off the
stack. Remember, assignment is an expression, so it needs to leave that value
there in case the assignment is nested inside some larger expression.

[implicit]: statements-and-state.html#design-note

Add a dash of disassembly:

^code disassemble-set-global (1 before, 1 after)

So we're done, right? Well... not quite. We've made a mistake! Take a gander at:

```lox
a * b = c + d;
```

According to Lox's grammar, `=` has the lowest precedence, so this should be
parsed roughly like:

<img src="image/global-variables/ast-good.png" alt="The expected parse, like '(a * b) = (c + d)'." />

Obviously, `a * b` isn't a <span name="do">valid</span> assignment target, so
this should be a syntax error. But here's what our parser does:

<aside name="do">

Wouldn't it be wild if `a * b` *was* a valid assignment target, though? You
could imagine some algebra-like language that tried to divide the assigned value
up in some reasonable way and distribute it to `a` and `b`. ...That's probably
a terrible idea.

</aside>

1.  First, `parsePrecedence()` parses `a` using the `variable()` prefix parser.
1.  After that, it enters the infix parsing loop.
1.  It reaches the `*` and calls `binary()`.
1.  That recursively calls `parsePrecedence()` to parse the right-hand operand.
1.  That calls `variable()` again for parsing `b`.
1.  Inside that call to `variable()`, it looks for a trailing `=`. It sees one
    and thus parses the rest of the line as an assignment.

In other words, the parser sees the above code like:

<img src="image/global-variables/ast-bad.png" alt="The actual parse, like 'a * (b = c + d)'." />

We've messed up the precedence handling because `variable()` doesn't take into
account the precedence of the surrounding expression that contains the variable.
If the variable happens to be the right-hand side of an infix operator, or the
operand of a unary operator, then that containing expression is too high
precedence to permit the `=`.

To fix this, `variable()` should only look for and consume the `=` if it's in
the context of a low precedence expression. The code that knows the current
precedence is, logically enough, `parsePrecedence()`. The `variable()` function
doesn't need to know the actual level. It just cares that the precedence is low
enough to allow assignment, so we pass that fact in as a Boolean:

^code prefix-rule (4 before, 2 after)

Since assignment is the lowest precedence expression, the only time we allow an
assignment is when parsing an assignment expression or top-level expression like
in an expression statement. That flag makes its way to:

^code variable

Which accepts the parameter:

^code named-variable-signature (1 after)

And then uses it:

^code named-variable-can-assign (2 before, 1 after)

That's a lot of plumbing to get literally one bit of data to the right place in
the compiler, but arrived it has. If the variable is nested inside some
expression with higher precedence, `canAssign` will be `false` and this will
ignore the `=` even if there is one there. Then this returns and eventually
makes its way back to `parsePrecedence()`.

Then what? What does the compiler do with our broken example from before? Right
now, `variable()` won't consume the `=` so that will be the current token. It
returns back to `parsePrecedence()`. `variable()` is a prefix parser, so then it
tries to enter the infix parsing loop. There is no parsing function associated
with `=`, so it skips that loop.

Then `parsePrecedence()` silently returns back to the caller. That also isn't
right. If the `=` doesn't get consumed as part of the expression, nothing else
is going to consume it. It's an error and we should report it:

^code invalid-assign (5 before, 1 after)

With that, the previous bad program correctly gets an error at compile time. OK,
*now* are we done? Still not quite. See, we're passing an argument to one of the
parse functions. But those functions are stored in a table of function pointers,
so all of the parse functions need to have the same type. Even though most parse
functions don't support being used as an assignment target -- setters are the
<span name="index">only</span> other one -- our friendly C compiler requires
them *all* to accept the parameter.

<aside name="index">

If Lox had arrays and subscript operators like `array[index]` then an infix `[`
would also allow assignment to support `array[index] = value`.

</aside>

So we're going to finish off this chapter with some grunt work. First, let's go
ahead and pass the flag to the infix parse functions:

^code infix-rule (1 before, 1 after)

We'll need that for setters eventually. Then we'll fix the typedef for the
function type:

^code parse-fn-type (2 before, 2 after)

And some completely tedious code to accept this parameter in all of our existing
parse functions:

^code binary (1 after)

And:

^code parse-literal (1 after)

And:

^code grouping (1 after)

And:

^code number (1 after)

And:

^code string (1 after)

And, finally:

^code unary (1 after)

Phew! We're back to a C program we can compile. Fire it up and now you can run:

```lox
var breakfast = "beignets";
var beverage = "cafe au lait";
breakfast = "beignets with " + beverage;

print breakfast;
```

It's starting to look like real code for an actual language!

<div class="challenges">

## Challenges

1.  The compiler adds a global variable's name to the constant table as a string
    every time an identifier is encountered. It creates a new constant each
    time, even if that variable name is already in a previous slot in the
    constant table. That's wasteful in cases where the same variable is
    referenced multiple times by the same function. That in turn increases the
    odds of filling up the constant table and running out of slots, since we
    only allow 256 constants in a single chunk.

    Optimize this. How does your optimization affect the performance of the
    compiler compared to the runtime? Is this the right trade-off?

2.  Looking up a global variable by name in a hash table each time it is used
    is pretty slow, even with a good hash table. Can you come up with a more
    efficient way to store and access global variables without changing the
    semantics?

3.  When running in the REPL, a user might write a function that references an
    unknown global variable. Then, in the next line, they declare the variable.
    Lox should handle this gracefully by not reporting an "unknown variable"
    compile error when the function is first defined.

    But when a user runs a Lox *script*, the compiler has access to the full
    text of the entire program before any code is run. Consider this program:

        :::lox
        fun useVar() {
          print oops;
        }

        var ooops = "too many o's!";

    Here, we can tell statically that `oops` will not be defined because there
    is *no* declaration of that global anywhere in the program. Note that
    `useVar()` is never called either, so even though the variable isn't
    defined, no runtime error will occur because it's never used either.

    We could report mistakes like this as compile errors, at least when running
    from a script. Do you think we should? Justify your answer. What do other
    scripting languages you know do?

</div>
