^title Methods and Initializers
^part A Bytecode Virtual Machine

> When you are on the dancefloor, there is nothing to do but dance.
>
> <cite>Umberto Eco, <em>The Mysterious Flame of Queen Loana</em></cite>

It is time for our virtual machine to bring its nascent objects to life with
behavior. That means methods and method calls. And, since they are a special
kind of method, we will include initializers too.

All of this is familiar territory from our previous jlox interpreter. What's new
in this second trip is an important optimization we will implement to make
method calls over seven times faster than our baseline performance. But before
we get to that fun, we gotta get the basic stuff working.

## Method Declarations

We can't optimize method calls before we have method calls, and we can't call
methods without having methods to call, so we'll start with declarations.

### Representing methods

We usually start in the compiler, but let's knock the object model out first
this time. The runtime representation for methods in clox is similar to jlox.
Each class stores a hash table of methods. Keys are method names and each value
is an ObjClosure for the body of the method:

^code class-methods (3 before, 1 after)

A brand new class begins with an empty method table:

^code init-methods (1 before, 1 after)

The ObjClass struct owns the memory for this table, so when the memory manager
deallocates a class, the table should be freed too:

^code free-methods (1 before, 1 after)

Speaking of memory managers, the GC needs to trace through classes into the
method table. If a class is still reachable (likely through some instance),
then all of its methods certainly need to stick around too:

^code mark-methods (1 before, 1 after)

We use the existing `markTable()` function which traces through the key strings
and value in each table entry.

Storing a class's methods is pretty familiar coming from jlox. The different
part is how that table gets populated. Our previous interpreter had access to
the entire AST node for the class declaration and all of the methods it
contains. At runtime, the interpreter simply walked that list of declarations.

Now every piece of information the compiler wants to shunt over to the runtime
has to squeeze through the interface of a flat series of bytecode instructions.
How do we take a class declaration, which can contain an arbitrarily large set
of methods, and represent it as bytecode? It's time to move to the compiler...

### Compiling method declarations

The last chapter left us with a compiler that parses classes but only allows an
empty body. We expand that to compile a series of method declarations between
the braces:

^code class-body (1 before, 1 after)

Lox doesn't have field declarations, so anything before the closing brace that
ends a class body must be a method. We stop compiling methods when we hit that
final curly or if we reach the end of the file. The latter check ensures our
compiler doesn't get stuck in an infinite loop if the user accidentally forgets
the closing brace.

Before we dig into the implementation of `method()`, let's think about how it
might work. The problem is that a class may declare any number of methods
and somehow the runtime needs to look up and bind all of them. Packing all of
that information into a single `OP_CLASS` instruction would be a challenge.

Instead, our bytecode representation of a class declaration will split creating
a class and its methods into a <span name="series">*series*</span> of
instructions. The compiler already emits an `OP_CLASS` instruction that creates
a new empty ObjClass object. Then it emits instructions to store the class in a
variable with its name.

<aside name="series">

We used a similar technique for closures. The `OP_CLOSURE` instruction needs to
know the type and index for each captured upvalue. We encoded that using a
series of pseudo-instructions following the main `OP_CLOSURE` instruction --
basically a variable number of operands. The VM processed all of those extra
bytes in a loop when interpreting the `OP_CLOSURE` instruction.

Here our approach is a little different because from the VM's perspective,
each instruction to define a method is a separate standalone operation. Either
approach would work. I chose this one for methods because it doesn't require us
to know the number of methods when emitting the first `OP_CLASS` instruction.

</aside>

Now, for each method declaration, we emit a new `OP_METHOD` instruction that
adds a single method to that class. When all of the `OP_METHOD` instructions
have executed, we're left with a fully formed class. While the user sees a class
declaration as a single atomic operation, the VM implements it as a series of
mutations.

To define a new method, the VM needs three things:

1.  The name of the method.
1.  The closure for the method body.
1.  The class to bind the method to.

We'll incrementally write the compiler code to see how those all get through to
the runtime, starting with this:

^code method

Like `OP_GET_PROPERTY` and other instructions that need names at runtime, the
compiler adds the method name token's lexeme to the constant table, getting back
a table index. Then we emit an `OP_METHOD` instruction with that index as the
operand. That's the name. Next is the method body:

^code method-body (1 before, 1 after)

We use the same `function()` helper that we use to compile function
declarations. That utility function compiles the subsequent parameter list and
function body. Then it emits the code to create an ObjClosure and leave it on
top of the stack. At runtime, the VM will find the closure there.

Last is the class to bind the method to. Where can the VM find that?
Unfortunately, by the time we reach the `OP_METHOD` instruction, we don't know
where it is. It <span name="global">could</span> be on the stack, if the user
declared the class in a local scope. But a top-level class declaration ends up
with the ObjClass in the global variable table.

<aside name="global">

If Lox only supported declaring classes at the top level, the VM could assume
that any class could be found by looking it up directly from the global
variable table. Alas, because we support local classes, we need to handle that
case too.

</aside>

Fear not. The compiler does know the *name* of the class. We can capture it
right after we consume its token:

^code class-name (1 before, 1 after)

And we know that no other declaration with that name could possibly shadow it.
So we do the easy fix. Before we start binding methods, we emit whatever code is
necessary to load the class back on top of the stack:

^code load-class (2 before, 1 after)

Right before compiling the class body, we <span name="load">call</span>
`namedVariable()`. That helper function generates code to load a variable with
the given name onto the stack. Then we compile the methods.

<aside name="load">

The preceding call to `defineVariable()` pops the class, so it seems silly to
call `namedVariable()` to load it right back onto the stack. Why not simply
leave it on the stack in the first place? We could, but in the [next
chapter][super] we will insert code between these two calls to support
inheritance. At that point, it will be simpler if the class isn't sitting around
on the stack.

[super]: superclasses.html

</aside>

This means that when we execute each `OP_METHOD` instruction, the top of the
stack is the closure for the method with the class right under it. Once we've
reached the end of the methods, we no longer need the class and pop it off the
stack:

^code pop-class (1 before, 2 after)

Putting all of that together, here is a class declaration to throw at the
compiler:

```lox
class Brunch {
  eggs() {}
  bacon() {}
}
```

It generates the following bytecode instructions and at runtime this is what we
want the stack to do:

<img src="image/methods-and-initializers/method-instructions.png" alt="The series of bytecode instructions for a class declaration with two methods." />

All that remains is for us to implement the runtime half of that illustration.

### Executing method declarations

First we define the opcode:

^code method-op (1 before, 1 after)

We disassemble it like other instructions that have string constant operands:

^code disassemble-method (2 before, 1 after)

And over in the interpreter, we add a new case too:

^code interpret-method (1 before, 1 after)

There, we read the method name from the constant table and then pass it here:

^code define-method

The method closure is on top of the stack, above the class it will be bound to.
We read those two stack slots and store the closure in the class's method table.
Then we pop the closure since we're done with it.

Note that we don't do any runtime type checking on the closure or class object.
That `AS_CLASS()` call is safe because the compiler itself generated the code
that causes the class to be in that stack slot. The VM <span
name="verify">trusts</span> its own compiler.

<aside name="verify">

The VM trusts that the instructions it executes are valid because the *only* way
to get code to the bytecode interpreter is by going through clox's own compiler.
Many bytecode VMs like the JVM and CPython support executing bytecode that has
been compiled separately. That leads to a different security story. Maliciously
crafted bytecode could crash the VM or worse.

To prevent that, the JVM does a bytecode verification pass before it executes
any loaded code. CPython says it's up to the user to ensure any bytecode they
run is safe.

</aside>

After the series of `OP_METHOD` instructions is done and the `OP_POP` has popped
the class, we will have a nicely populated class ready to start doing things.
Next is pulling those methods back out.

## Method References

Most of the time, methods are accessed and immediately called, leading to this
familiar syntax:

```lox
instance.method(argument);
```

But remember in Lox and some other languages those two steps are distinct and
can be separated:

```lox
var closure = instance.method;
closure(argument);
```

Since users *can* separate the operations, we have to implement them separately.
The first step is using our existing dotted property syntax to access a method
defined on the instance's class. That should return some kind of object that the
user can then call like a function.

The obvious approach is to look up the method in the class's method table and
return the ObjClosure associated with that name. But we also need to remember
that when you access a method, `this` gets bound to the instance the method was
accessed from. Here's the example from [when we added methods to jlox][jlox]:

[jlox]: classes.html#methods-on-classes

```lox
class Person {
  sayName() {
    print this.name;
  }
}

var jane = Person();
jane.name = "Jane";

var method = jane.sayName;
method(); // ?
```

This should print "Jane", so the object returned by `.sayName` somehow needs to
remember the instance when it later gets called. In jlox, we implemented that
"memory" using the interpreter's existing heap-allocated Environment class,
which handled all variable storage.

Our bytecode VM has a more complex architecture for storing state. [Local
variables and temporaries][locals] are on the stack, [globals][] are in a hash
table, and variables in closures use [upvalues][]. That necessitates a somewhat
more complex solution for tracking a method's receiver in clox, and a new
runtime type.

[locals]: local-variables.html#representing-local-variables
[globals]: global-variables.html#variable-declarations
[upvalues]: closures.html#upvalues

### Bound methods

When the user executes a method access, we'll find the closure for that method
and wrap it in a new <span name="bound">"bound method"</span> object that tracks
the instance that the method was accessed from. This bound object can be called
later like a function. When invoked, the VM will do some shenanigans to wire up
`this` to point to the receiver inside the method's body.

<aside name="bound">

I took the name "bound method" from CPython. Python behaves similar to Lox here
and I used its implementation for inspiration.

</aside>

Here's the new object type:

^code obj-bound-method (2 before, 1 after)

It wraps the receiver and the method closure together. The receiver's type is
Value even though methods can only be called on ObjInstances. Since the VM
doesn't care what kind of receiver it has anyway, using Value means we don't
have to keep converting the pointer back to a Value when it gets passed to more
general functions.

The new struct implies the usual boilerplate you're used to by now. A new case
in the object type enum:

^code obj-type-bound-method (1 before, 1 after)

A macro to check a value's type:

^code is-bound-method (2 before, 1 after)

Another to cast the value to an ObjBoundMethod pointer:

^code as-bound-method (2 before, 1 after)

A function to create a new ObjBoundMethod:

^code new-bound-method-h (2 before, 1 after)

And an implementation here:

^code new-bound-method

The constructor-like function simply stores the given closure and receiver. When
the bound method is no longer needed, we free it:

^code free-bound-method (1 before, 1 after)

The bound method has a couple of references, but it doesn't *own* them, so it
frees nothing but itself. However, those references do get traced by the garbage
collector:

^code blacken-bound-method (1 before, 1 after)

This <span name="trace">ensures</span> that a handle to a method keeps the
receiver around in memory so that `this` can still find the object when you
invoke the handle later. We also trace the method closure.

<aside name="trace">

Tracing the method closure isn't really necessary. The receiver is an
ObjInstance which has a pointer to its ObjClass, which has a table for all of
the methods. But it feels dubious to me in some vague way to have ObjBoundMethod
rely on that.

</aside>

The last operation all objects support is printing:

^code print-bound-method (1 before, 1 after)

A bound method prints exactly the same way as a function. From the user's
perspective, a bound method *is* a function. It's an object they can call. We
don't expose that the VM implements bound methods using a different object type.

<aside name="party">

<img src="image/methods-and-initializers/party-hat.png" alt="A party hat." />

</aside>

Put on your <span name="party">party</span> hat because we just reached a little
milestone. ObjBoundMethod is the very last runtime type to add to clox. You've
written your last `IS_` and `AS_` macros. We're only a few chapters from the end
of the book and we're getting close to a complete VM.

### Accessing methods

Let's get our new object type doing something. Methods are accessed using the
same "dot" property syntax we implemented in the last chapter. The compiler
already parses the right expressions and emits `OP_GET_PROPERTY` instructions
for them. The only changes we need to make are in the runtime.

When a property access instruction executes, the instance is on top of the
stack. The instruction's job is to find a field or method with the given name
and replace the top of the stack with the accessed property.

The interpreter already handles fields, so we simply extend the
`OP_GET_PROPERTY` case with another section:

^code get-method (5 before, 1 after)

We insert this after the code to look up a field on the receiver instance.
Fields take priority over and shadow methods, so we look for a field first. If
the instance does not have a field with the given property name, then the name
may refer to a method.

We take the instance's class and pass it to a new `bindMethod()` helper. If the
function finds a method, it places the method on the stack and returns `true`.
Otherwise it returns `false` to indicate a method with that name couldn't be
found. Since the name also wasn't a field, that means we have a runtime error,
which aborts the interpreter.

Here is the good stuff:

^code bind-method

First we look for a method with the given name in the class's method table. If
we don't find one, we report a runtime error and bail out. Otherwise, we take
the method and wrap it in a new ObjBoundMethod. We grab the receiver from its
home on top of the stack. Finally, we pop the instance and replace the top of
the stack with the bound method.

<span name="bind"></span>

<aside name="bind">

Given this script:

```lox
class Brunch {
  eggs() {}
}

var brunch = Brunch();
var eggs = brunch.eggs;
```

The illustration shows what happens when the VM executes the `bindMethod()` call
for this `brunch.eggs` expression.

</aside>

<img src="image/methods-and-initializers/bind-method.png" alt="The stack changes caused by bindMethod()." />

### Calling methods

The user can declare methods on classes, access them on instances, and get bound
methods onto the stack. They just can't <span name="do">*do*</span> anything
useful with those bound method objects. The operation we're missing is calling
them. Calls are implemented in `callValue()`, so we add a case there for the new
object type:

<aside name="do">

A bound method *is* a first class value, so they can store it in variables, pass
it to functions, and otherwise do "value"-y stuff with it.

</aside>

^code call-bound-method (1 before, 1 after)

We pull the raw closure back out of the ObjBoundMethod and use the existing
`call()` helper to begin an invocation of that closure by pushing a CallFrame
for it onto the call stack. That's all it takes to be able to run this Lox
program:

```lox
class Scone {
  topping(first, second) {
    print "scone with " + first + " and " + second;
  }
}

var scone = Scone();
scone.topping("berries", "cream");
```

That's three big steps. We can declare, access, and invoke methods. But
something is missing. We went to all that trouble to wrap the method closure in
an object that binds the receiver, but when we invoke the method here, we don't
use that receiver at all.

## This

The reason bound methods need to keep hold of the receiver is so that it can be
accessed inside the body of the method. Lox exposes a method's receiver through
`this` expressions. The lexer already treats `this` as a special token type, so
the first step is wiring that token up in the parse table:

^code table-this (1 before, 1 after)

<aside name="this">

The underscore at the end of the name of the parser function is because `this`
is a reserved word in C++ and we support compiling clox as C++.

</aside>

When the parser encounters a `this` in prefix position, it dispatches to:

^code this

We'll apply the same implementation technique for `this` in clox that we used in
jlox. We treat `this` as a lexically-scoped local variable whose value gets
magically initialized. Compiling it like a local variable means we get a lot of
behavior for free. In particular, closures inside a method that reference `this`
will do the right thing and capture the receiver in an upvalue.

When the parser function is called, the `this` token has just been consumed and
is stored as the previous token. We call our existing `variable()` function
which compiles identifier expressions as variable accesses. It takes a single
Boolean parameter for whether the compiler should look for a following `=`
operator and parse a setter. You can't assign to `this`, so we pass `false` to
disallow that.

The `variable()` function doesn't care that `this` has its own token type and
isn't an identifier. It is happy to treat the lexeme "this" as if it were a
variable name and then look it up using the existing scope resolution machinery.
Right now, that lookup will fail because we never declared a variable whose name
is "this". It's time to think about where the receiver should live in memory.

At least until they get captured by closures, clox stores every local variable
on the VM's stack. The compiler keeps track of which slots in the function's
stack window are owned by which local variables. If you recall, the compiler
sets aside stack slot zero by declaring a local variable whose name is an empty
string.

For function calls, that slot ends up holding the function being called. Since
the slot has no name, the function body never accesses it. You can guess where
this is going. For *method* calls, we can repurpose that slot to store the
receiver. Slot zero will store the instance that `this` is bound to. In order to
compile `this` expressions, the compiler simply needs to give the right name to
that local variable:

^code slot-zero (1 before, 1 after)

We only want to do this for methods. Function declarations don't have a `this`.
And, in fact, they *must not* declare a variable named "this", so that if you
write a `this` expression inside a function declaration which is itself inside a
method, the `this` correctly resolves to the outer method's receiver:

```lox
class Nested {
  method() {
    fun function() {
      print this;
    }

    function();
  }
}

Nested().method();
```

This program should print "Nested instance". To decide what name to give to
local slot zero, the compiler needs to know whether it's compiling a function or
method declaration, so we add a new case to our FunctionType enum to distinguish
methods:

^code method-type-enum (1 before, 1 after)

When we compile a method, we use that type:

^code method-type (2 before, 1 after)

Now we can correctly compile references to the special "this" variable and the
compiler will emit the right `OP_GET_LOCAL` instructions to access it. Closures
can even capture `this` and store the receiver in upvalues. Pretty cool.

Except that at runtime, the receiver isn't actually *in* slot zero. The
interpreter isn't holding up its end of the bargain yet. Here is the fix:

^code store-receiver (2 before, 2 after)

When a method is called, the top of the stack contains all of the arguments and
then just under those is the closure of the called method. That's where slot
zero in the new CallFrame will be. This line of code inserts the receiver into
that slot. For example, given a method call like `scone.topping("berries",
"cream")`, we calculate the slot to store the receiver like so:

<img src="image/methods-and-initializers/closure-slot.png" alt="Skipping over the argument stack slots to find the slot containing the closure." />

The `-argCount` skips past the arguments and the `- 1` adjusts for the fact that
`stackTop` points just *past* the last used stack slot.

### Misusing this

Now our VM correctly supports users *correctly* using `this`, but we also need
to make sure it properly handles users *mis*-using `this`. Lox says it is a
compile error for a `this` expression to appear outside of the body of a method.
These two wrong uses should be caught by the compiler:

```lox
print this; // At top level.

fun notMethod() {
  print this; // In a function.
}
```

So how does the compiler know if it's inside a method? The obvious answer is to
look at the FunctionType of the current Compiler. We did just add an enum case
there to treat methods specially. However, that wouldn't correctly handle code
like the earlier example where you are inside a function which is itself nested
inside a method.

We could try to resolve "this" and then report an error if it wasn't found in
any of the surrounding lexical scopes. That would work, but would require us to
shuffle around a bunch of code since right now the code for resolving a variable
implicitly considers it a global access if no declaration is found.

In the next chapter, we will need information about the nearest enclosing class.
If we had that, we could use it here to determine if we are inside a method. So
we may as well make our future self's life a little easier and put that
machinery in place now:

^code current-class (1 before, 2 after)

This module variable points to a struct representing the current innermost class
being compiled. The new type looks like this:

^code class-compiler-struct (1 before, 2 after)

Right now we store only the class's name. We also keep a pointer to the
ClassCompiler for the enclosing class, if any. Nesting a class declaration
inside a method in some other class is an uncommon thing to do, but Lox supports
it. Just like the Compiler struct, this means ClassCompiler forms a linked list
from the current innermost class being compiled out through all of the enclosing
classes.

If we aren't inside any class declaration at all, the module variable
`currentClass` is `NULL`. When the compiler begins compiling a class, it pushes
a new ClassCompiler onto that implict linked stack:

^code create-class-compiler (2 before, 1 after)

The memory for the ClassCompiler struct lives right on the C stack, a handy
capability we get by writing our compiler using recursive descent. At the end of
the class body, we pop that compiler off the stack and restore the enclosing
one:

^code pop-enclosing (1 before, 1 after)

When an outermost class body ends, `enclosing` will be `NULL`, so this resets
`currentClass` to `NULL`. Thus to see if we are inside a class -- and thus
inside a method -- we simply check that module variable:

^code this-outside-class (1 before, 1 after)

With that, `this` outside of a class is correctly forbidden. Now our methods
really feel like *methods* in the object-oriented sense. Accessing the receiver
lets them affect the instance you called the method on. We're getting there!

## Instance Initializers

The reason object-oriented languages tie state and behavior together -- one of
the core tenets of the paradigm -- is to ensure that objects are always in a
valid, meaningful state. When the only way to touch an object's state is <span
name="through">through</span> its methods, the methods can make sure nothing
goes awry. But that presumes the object is *already* in a proper state. What
about when it's first created?

<aside name="through">

Of course, Lox does let outside code directly access and modify an instance's
fields without going through its methods. This is unlike Ruby and Smalltalk
which completely encapsulate state inside objects. Our toy scripting language,
alas, isn't so principled.

</aside>

Object-oriented languages ensure that brand new objects are properly set up
through constructors, which both produce a new instance and initialize its
state. In Lox, the runtime allocates new raw instances, and a class may declare
an initializer to set up any fields. Initializers work mostly like normal
methods, with a few tweaks:

1.  The runtime automatically invokes the initializer method whenever an
    instance of a class is created.

2.  The caller that constructs an instance always gets the instance <span
    name="return">back</span> after the initializer finishes, regardless of what
    the initializer function itself returns. The initializer method doesn't need
    to explicitly return `this`.

3.  In fact, an initializer is *prohibited* from returning any value at all
    since the value would never be seen anyway.

<aside name="return">

It's like the initializer is implicitly wrapped in a bundle of code like:

```lox
fun create(klass) {
  var obj = newInstance(klass);
  obj.init();
  return obj;
}
```

Note how the value returned by `init()` is discarded.

</aside>

Now that we support methods, to add initializers, we merely need to implement
those three special rules. We'll go in order.

### Invoking initializers

First, automatically calling `init()` on new instances:

^code call-init (1 before, 1 after)

After the runtime allocates the new instance, we look for an `init()` method on
the class. If we find one, we initiate a call to it. This pushes a new CallFrame
for the initializer's closure. Say we run this program:

```lox
class Brunch {
  init(food, drink) {}
}

Brunch("eggs", "coffee");
```

When the VM executes the call to `Brunch()`, it goes like this:

<img src="image/methods-and-initializers/init-call-frame.png" alt="The aligned stack windows for the Brunch() call and the corresponding init() method it forwards to." />

Any arguments passed to the class when we called it are still sitting on the
stack above the instance. The new CallFrame for the `init()` method shares that
stack window so those arguments implictly get forwarded to the initializer.

Lox doesn't require a class to define an initializer. If omitted, the runtime
simply returns the new uninitialized instance. However, if there is no `init()`
method, then it doesn't make any sense to pass arguments to the class when
creating the instance. We make that an error:

^code no-init-arity-error (2 before, 1 after)

It's as if a class without an initializer gets a default one like:

```lox
init() {}
```

When the class *does* provide an initializer, we also need to ensure that the
expected number of arguments passed match the initializer's arity. Fortunately,
the `call()` helper does that for us already.

To call the initializer, the runtime looks up the `init()` method by name. We
want that to be fast since it happens every time an instance is constructed.
That means it would be good to take advantage of the string interning we've
already implemented. To do that, the VM creates an ObjString for "init" and
reuses it. The string lives right in the VM struct:

^code vm-init-string (1 before, 1 after)

We create and intern the string when the VM boots up:

^code init-init-string (1 before, 2 after)

We want it to stick around, so the GC considers it a root:

^code mark-init-string (1 before, 1 after)

Look carefully. See any bug waiting to happen? No? It's a subtle one. The
garbage collector now reads `vm.initString`. That variable gets initialized by
the result of calling `copyString()`. But that function itself allocates memory,
which can trigger a GC. If the collector ran at just the wrong time, it would
read `vm.initString` before it had been initialized. So, first we zero the
field out:

^code null-init-string (2 before, 2 after)

We forget the string pointer when the VM shuts down since the next line will
free it:

^code clear-init-string (1 before, 1 after)

OK, that lets us call initializers.

### Initializer return values

The next step is ensuring that constructing an instance of a class with an
initializer always returns the new instance and not `nil` or whatever the body
of the initializer returns. Right now, if a class defines an initializer, then
when an instance is constructed, the VM pushes a call to that initializer onto
the CallFrame stack. Then it just keeps on trucking.

The user's invocation on the class to create the instance will complete whenever
that initializer method returns and will leave on the stack whatever value the
initializer puts there. That means that unless the user takes care to put
`return this;` at the end of the initializer, no instance will come out. Not
very helpful.

To fix this, whenever the front end compiles an initializer method, it will emit
different bytecode at the end of the body to return `this` from the method
instead of the usual implicit `nil` most functions return. In order to do
*that*, the compiler needs to actually know when it is compiling an initializer.
We detect that by checking to see if the name of the method we're compiling is
"init":

^code initializer-name (1 before, 1 after)

We define a new function type to distinguish initializers from other methods:

^code initializer-type-enum (1 before, 1 after)

Whenever the compiler emits the implicit return at the end of a body, we check
the type to decide whether to insert the initializer-specific behavior:

^code return-this (1 before, 1 after)

In an initializer, instead of pushing `nil` onto the stack before returning,
we load slot zero, which contains the instance. This `emitReturn()` function is
also called when compiling a return statement without a value, so this also
correctly handles cases where the user does an early return inside the
initializer.

### Incorrect returns in initializers

The last step, the last item in our list of special features of initializers, is
making it an error to try to return anything *else* from an initializer. Now
that the compiler tracks the method type, this is straightforward:

^code return-from-init (3 before, 1 after)

We report an error if a return statement in an initializer has a value. We still
go ahead and compile the value afterwards so that the compiler doesn't get
confused by the trailing expression and report a bunch of cascaded errors.

Aside from inheritance, which we'll get to [soon][super], we now have a
fairly full-featured class system working in clox:

```lox
class CoffeeMaker {
  init(coffee) {
    this.coffee = coffee;
  }

  brew() {
    print "Enjoy your cup of " + this.coffee;

    // No reusing the grounds!
    this.coffee = nil;
  }
}

var maker = CoffeeMaker("coffee and chicory");
maker.brew();
```

Pretty fancy for a C program that would fit on an old <span
name="floppy">floppy</span> disk.

<aside name="floppy">

I acknowledge that "floppy disk" may no longer be a useful size reference for
current generations of programmers. Maybe I should have said "a few tweets" or
something.

</aside>

## Optimized Invocations

Our VM correctly implements the language's semantics for method calls and
initializers. We could stop here. But the main reason we are building an entire
second implementation of Lox from scratch is to execute faster than our old Java
interpreter. Right now, method calls even in clox are slow.

Lox's semantics define a method invocation as two operations -- accessing the
method and then calling the result. Our VM must support those as separate
operations because the user *can* separate them. You can access a method without
calling it and then invoke the bound method later. Nothing we've implemented so
far is unnecessary.

But *always* executing those as separate operations has a significant cost.
Every single time a Lox program accesses and invokes a method, the runtime
heap-allocates a new ObjBoundMethod, initializes its fields, then pulls them
right back out. Later, the GC has to spend time freeing all of those ephemeral
bound methods.

Most of the time, a Lox program accesses a method and and then immediately calls
it. The bound method is created by one bytecode instruction and then consumed by
the very next one. In fact, it's so immediate that the compiler can even
textually *see* that it's happening -- a dotted property access followed by an
opening parenthesis is most likely a method call.

Since we can recognize this pair of operations at compile time, we have the
opportunity to emit a <span name="super">new special</span> instruction that
performs an optimized method call. We start in the function that compiles dotted
property expressions:

<aside name="super" class="bottom">

Recognizing that a few specific bytecode instructions often occur one after the
other and creating a new single instruction -- called a **superinstruction** --
that fuses those into one operation is a classic optimization technique in
bytecode VMs.

One of the largest performance drains in a bytecode interpreter is the overhead
of decoding and dispatching each instruction. Fusing several instructions into
one eliminates some of that.

The challenge is determining *which* instruction sequences are common enough to
benefit from this optimization. Every new superinstruction claims an opcode for
its own use and there are only so many of those to go around. Add too many and
you'll need a larger encoding for opcodes which then increases code size and
makes decoding *all* instructions slower.

</aside>

^code parse-call (3 before, 1 after)

After the compiler has parsed the property name, we look for a left parenthesis.
If we match one, we switch to a new code path. There, we compile the argument
list exactly like we do when compiling a call expression. Then we emit a single
new `OP_INVOKE` instruction. It takes two operands:

1.  The index of the property name in the constant table.
2.  The number of arguments passed to the method.

In other words, this single instruction combines the operands of the
`OP_GET_PROPERTY` and `OP_CALL` instructions it replaces, in that order. It
really is a fusion of those two instructions. Let's define it:

^code invoke-op (1 before, 1 after)

And add it to the disassembler:

^code disassemble-invoke (2 before, 1 after)

This is a new, special, instruction format, so it needs a little custom
disassembly logic:

^code invoke-instruction

We read the two operands and then print out both the method name and the
argument count. Over in the interpreter's bytecode dispatch loop is where the
real action begins:

^code interpret-invoke (4 before, 1 after)

Most of the work happens in `invoke()`, which we'll get to. Here, we look up the
method name from the first operand and then read the argument count operand.
Then we hand off to `invoke()` to do the heavy lifting. That function returns
`true` if the invocation succeeds. As usual, a `false` return means a runtime
error occurred. We check for that here and abort the interpreter if disaster
struck.

Finally, assuming the invocation succeeded, then there is a new CallFrame on the
stack, so we refresh our cached copy of the current frame in `frame`.

The interesting work happens here:

^code invoke

First we grab the receiver off the stack. The arguments passed to the method are
above it on the stack, so we peek that many slots down. Then it's a simple
matter to cast the object to an instance and invoke the method on it.

That does assume the object *is* an instance. As with `OP_GET_PROPERTY`
instructions, we also need to handle the case where a user incorrectly tries to
call a method on a value of the wrong type:

^code invoke-check-type (1 before, 1 after)

<span name="helper">That's</span> a runtime error, so we report that and bail
out. Otherwise, we get the instance's class and jump over to this other new
utility function:

<aside name="helper">

As you can guess by now, we split this code into a separate function because
we're going to reuse it later -- in this case for `super` calls.

</aside>

^code invoke-from-class

This function combines the logic of how the VM implements `OP_GET_PROPERTY` and
`OP_CALL` instructions, in that order. First we look up the method by name in
the class's method table. If we don't find one, we report that runtime error and
exit.

Otherwise, we take the method's closure and push a call to it onto the CallFrame
stack. We don't need to heap allocate and initialize an ObjBoundMethod. In fact,
we don't even need to <span name="juggle">juggle</span> anything on the stack.
The receiver and method arguments are already right where they need to be.

<aside name="juggle">

This is a key reason *why* we use stack slot zero to store the receiver -- it's
how the caller already organizes the stack for a method call. An efficient
calling convention is an important part of a bytecode VM's performance story.

</aside>

If you fire up the VM and run a little program that calls methods now, you
should see the exact same behavior as before. But, if we did our job right, the
*performance* should be much improved. I wrote a little micro-benchmark that
does a batch of 10,000 method calls. Then it tests how many of these batches it
can execute in 10 seconds. On my computer, without the new `OP_INVOKE`
instruction, it got through 1,089 batches. With this new optimization, it
finished 8,324 batches in the same time. That's *7.6 times faster*, which is a
huge improvement when it comes to programming language optimization.

<span name="pat"></span>

<aside name="pat">

We shouldn't pat ourselves on the back *too* firmly. This performance
improvement is relative to our own unoptimized method call implementation which
was quite slow. Doing a heap allocation for every single method call isn't going
to win any races.

</aside>

<img src="image/methods-and-initializers/benchmark.png" alt="Bar chart comparing the two benchmark results." />

### Invoking fields

The fundamental creed of optimization is: "Thou shalt not break correctness."
<span name="monte">Users</span> like it when a language implementation gives
them an answer faster, but only if it's the *right* answer. Alas, our
implementation of faster method invocations fails to uphold that tenet:

```lox
class Oops {
  init() {
    fun f() {
      print "not a method";
    }

    this.field = f;
  }
}

var oops = Oops();
oops.field();
```

The last line looks like a method call. The compiler thinks that it is and
dutifully emits an `OP_INVOKE` instruction for it. However, it's not. What is
actually happening is a *field* access that returns a function which then gets
called. Right now, instead of executing that correctly, our VM reports a runtime
error when it can't find a method named "field".

<aside name="monte">

There are cases where users may be satisfied when a program sometimes returns
the wrong answer in return for running significantly faster or with a better
bound on the performance. These are the field of [**Monte Carlo
algorithms**][monte]. For some use cases, this is a good trade-off.

[monte]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monte_Carlo_algorithm

The important part, though, is that the user is *choosing* to apply one of these
algorithms. We language implementers can't unilaterally decide to sacrifice
their program's correctness.

</aside>

Earlier, when we implemented `OP_GET_PROPERTY`, we handled both field and method
accesses. To squash this new bug, we need to do the same thing for `OP_INVOKE`:

^code invoke-field (1 before, 1 after)

Pretty simple fix. Before looking up a method on the instance's class, we look
for a field with the same name. If we find a field, then we store it on the
stack in place of the receiver, *under* the argument list. This is how
`OP_GET_PROPERTY` behaves since the latter instruction executes before a
subsequent parenthesized list of arguments has been evaluated.

Then we try to call that field's value like the callable that it hopefully is.
The `callValue()` helper will check the value's type and call it as appropriate
or report a runtime error if the field's value isn't a callable type like a
closure.

That's all it takes to make our optimization fully safe. We do sacrifice a
little performance, unfortunately. But that's the price you have to pay
sometimes. You occasionally get frustrated by optimizations you *could* do if
only the language wouldn't allow some annoying corner case. But, as language
<span name="designer">implementers</span>, we have to play the game we're given.

<aside name="designer">

As language *designers*, our role is very different. If we do control the
language itself, we may sometimes choose to restrict or change the language in
ways that enable optimizations. Users want expressive languages, but they also
want fast implementations. Sometimes it is good language design to sacrifice a
little power if you can give them perf in return.

</aside>

The code we wrote here follows a typical pattern in optimization:

1.  Recognize a common operation or sequence of operations that is performance
    critical. In this case, it is a property access followed by a call.

2.  Add an optimized implementation of that pattern. That's our `OP_INVOKE`
    instruction.

3.  Before the optimization kicks in, guard it with some conditional logic that
    validates that the pattern actually applies. If it does, stay on the fast
    path. Otherwise, fall back to a slower but more robust unoptimized behavior.
    Here, that means checking that we are actually calling a method and not
    accessing a field.

As your language work moves from getting the implementation working *at all* to
getting it to work *faster*, you will find yourself spending more and more
time looking for patterns like this and adding guarded optimizations for them.
Full-time VM engineers spend much of their careers in this loop.

But we can stop here for now. With this, clox now supports most of the features
of object-oriented programming language, and with respectable performance.

<div class="challenges">

## Challenges

1.  The hash table lookup to find a class's `init()` method is constant time,
    but still fairly slow. Implement something faster. Write a benchmark and
    measure the performance difference.

1.  In a dynamically-typed language like Lox, a single callsite may invoke a
    variety of methods on a number of classes throughout a program's execution.
    Even so, in practice, most of the time a callsite ends up calling the exact
    same method on the exact same class for the duration of the run. Most calls
    are actually not polymorphic even if the language says they can be.

    How do advanced language implementations optimize based on that observation?

1.  When interpreting an `OP_INVOKE` instruction, the VM has to do two hash
    table lookups. First, it looks for a field that could shadow a method and
    only if that fails does it look for a method. The former check is rarely
    useful -- most fields do not contain functions. But it is *necessary*
    because the language says fields and methods are accessed using the same
    syntax and fields shadow methods.

    That is a language *choice* that affects the performance of our
    implementation. Was it the right choice? If Lox were your language, what
    would you do?

</div>

<div class="design-note">

## Design Note: Novelty Budget

I still remember the first time I wrote a tiny BASIC program on a TRS-80 and
made a computer do something it hadn't done before. It felt like a superpower.
The first time I cobbled together just enough of a parser and interpreter to let
me write a tiny program in *my own language* that made a computer do a thing was
like some sort of higher-order meta-superpower. It was and remains a wonderful
feeling.

I realized I could design a language that looked and behaved however I chose. It
was like I'd been going to a private school that required uniforms my whole life
and then one day transferred to a public school where I could wear whatever I
wanted. I don't need to use curly braces for blocks? I can use something other
than an equals sign for assignment? I can do objects without classes? Multiple
inheritance *and* multimethods? A dynamic language that overloads statically, by
arity?

Naturally, I took that freedom and ran with it. I made the weirdest, most
arbitrary language design decisions. Apostrophes for generics. No commas between
arguments. Overload resolution that can fail at runtime. I did things
differently just for difference's sake.

This is a very fun experience that I highly recommend. We need more weird,
avant-garde programming languages. I want to see more art languages. I still
make oddball toy languages for fun sometimes.

*However*, if your goal is success where "success" is defined as a large number
of users, then your priorities must be different. In that case, your primary
goal is to have your language loaded into the brains of as many people as
possible. That's *really hard*. It takes a lot of human effort to move a
language's syntax and semantics from a computer into trillions of neurons.

Programmers are naturally conservative with their time and cautious about what
languages are worth uploading into their wetware. They don't want to waste their
time on a language that ends up not being useful to them. As a language
designer, your goal is thus to give them as much language power as you can with
as little required learning as possible.

One natural approach is *simplicity*. The fewer concepts and features your
language has, the less total volume of stuff there is to learn. This is one of
the reasons minimal <span name="dynamic">scripting</span> languages often find
success even though they aren't as powerful as the big industrial languages --
they are easier to get started with, and once they are in someone's brain, the
user wants to keep using them.

<aside name="dynamic">

In particular, this is a big advantage of dynamically-typed languages. A static
language requires you to learn *two* languages -- the runtime semantics and the
static type system -- before you can get to the point where you are making the
computer do stuff. Dynamic languages only require you to learn the former.

Eventually, programs get big enough that the value of static analysis pays for
the effort to learn that second static language, but the value proposition isn't
as obvious at the outset.

</aside>

The problem with simplicity is that simply cutting features often sacrifices
power and expressiveness. There is an art to finding features that punch above
their weight, but often minimal languages simply do less.

There is another path that avoids much of that problem. The trick is to realize
that a user doesn't have to load your entire language into their head, *just the
part they don't already have in there.* As I mentioned in an [earlier design
note][note], learning is about transferring the *delta* between what they
already know and what they need to know.

[note]: parsing-expressions.html#design-note

Many potential users of your language already know some other programming
language. Any features your language shares with that language are essentially
"free" when it comes to learning. It's already in their head, they just have to
recognize that your language does the same thing.

In other words, *familiarity* is another key tool to lower the adoption cost of
your language. Of course, if you fully maximize that attribute, the end result
is a language that is completely identical to some existing one. That's not a
recipe for success because at that point there's no incentive for users to
switch to your language at all.

So you do need to provide some compelling differences. Some things your language
can do that other languages can't or at least can't do as well. I believe this
is one of the fundamental balancing acts of language design: similarity to other
languages lowers learning cost, while divergence raises the compelling
advantages.

I think of this balancing act in terms of a <span name="idiosyncracy">**novelty
budget**</span>, or as Steve Klabnik calls it, a "[strangeness budget][]". Users
have a low threshold for the total amount of new stuff they are willing to
accept to learn a new language. Exceed that and they won't show up.

[strangeness budget]: https://words.steveklabnik.com/the-language-strangeness-budget

<aside name="idiosyncracy">

A related concept in psychology is [**idiosyncracy credit**][idiosyncracy], the
idea that other people in society grant you a finite amount of deviations from
social norms. You earn credit by fitting in and doing in-group things, which you
can then spend on oddball activities that might otherwise raise eyebrows. In
other words, demonstrating that you are "one of the good ones" gives you license
to raise your freak flag, but only so far.

[idiosyncracy]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idiosyncrasy_credit

</aside>

Anytime you add something new to your language that other languages don't have,
or anytime your language does something other languages do in a different way,
you spend some of that budget. That's OK -- you *need* to spend it to make your
language compelling. But your goal is to spend it *wisely*. For each feature or
difference, ask yourself how much compelling power it adds to your language and
then evaluate critically whether it pays its way. Is the change so valuable that
it is worth blowing some of your novelty budget?

In practice, I find this means that you end up being pretty conservative with
syntax and more adventurous with semantics. As fun as it is to put on a new
change of clothes, swapping out curly braces with some other block delimiter is
very unlikely to add much real power to the language, but it does spend some
novelty. It's hard for syntax differences to carry their weight.

On the other hand, new semantics can significantly increase the power of the
language. Multimethods, mixins, traits, reflection, dependent types, runtime
metaprogramming, etc. can radically level up what a user can do with the
language.

Alas, being conservative like this is not as fun as just changing everything.
But it's up to you to decide whether you want to chase mainstream success or not
in the first place. We don't all need to be radio-friendly pop bands. If you
want your language to be like free jazz or drone metal and are happy with the
proportionally smaller (but likely more devoted) audience size, go for it.

</div>
